candidate,year,speech
bush,2008,"The voters turned out in records numbers and delivered an historic victory. (APPLAUSE) Earlier today, Senator Kerry called with his congratulations. We had a really good phone call. He was very gracious. Senator Kerry waged a spirited campaign, and he and his supporters can be proud of their efforts. (APPLAUSE) Laura and I wish Senator Kerry and Teresa and their whole family all our best wishes. America has spoken, and I'm humbled by the  trust and the confidence of my fellow citizens.With that trust comes a duty to serve all Americans. And I will do my best to fulfill that duty every day as your president. (APPLAUSE) There are many people to thank and my family comes first. (APPLAUSE) Laura is the love of my life.I'm glad you love her too. (LAUGHTER) I want to thank our daughters who joined their dad for his last campaign. (APPLAUSE) I appreciate the hard work of my sister and brothers.I especially want to thank my parents for their loving support. (APPLAUSE) I'm grateful to the vice president and Lynne and their daughters who have worked so hard and been such a vital part of our team. (APPLAUSE) The vice president serves America with wisdom and honor and I'm proud to serve beside him.I want to thank my superb campaign team. I want to thank you all for your hard work. (APPLAUSE) I was impressed every day by how hard and how skillful our team was.I want to thank Chairman Marc Racicot and... (APPLAUSE) ... the campaign manager, Ken Mehlman... (APPLAUSE) ... the architect, Karl Rove. (APPLAUSE) I want to thank Ed Gillespie for leading our party so well.I want to thank the thousands of our supporters across our country. I want to thank you for your hugs on the rope lines. I want thank you for your prayers on the rope lines. I want to thank you for your kind words on the rope lines. I want to thank you for everything you did to make the calls and to put up the signs, to talk to your neighbors and to get out the vote. (APPLAUSE) And because you did the incredible work, we are celebrating today.There is an old saying, Do not pray for tasks equal to your powers; pray for powers equal to your tasks. In four historic years, America has been given great tasks and faced them with strength and courage. Our people have restored the vigor of this economy and shown resolve and patience in a new kind of war.Our military has brought justice to the enemy and honor to America. (APPLAUSE) Our nation has defended itself and served the freedom of al mankind. I'm proud to lead such an amazing country, and I'm proud to lead it forward. (APPLAUSE) Because we have done the hard work, we are entering a season of hope.We will continue our economic progress. We'll reform our outdated tax code. We'll strengthen the Social Security for the next generation. We'll make public schools all they can be. And we will uphold our deepest values of family and faith. We'll help the emerging democracies of Iraq and Afghanistan... (APPLAUSE) ... so they can grow in strength and defend their freedom.And then our service men and women will come home with the honor they have earned. (APPLAUSE) With good allies at our side, we will fight this war on terror with every resource of our national power so our children can live in freedom and in peace.Reaching these goals will require the broad support of Americans. So today I want to speak to every person who voted for my opponent. To make this nation stronger and better, I will need your support and I will work to earn it. I will do all I can do to deserve your trust. A new term is a new opportunity to reach out to the whole nation. We have one country, one Constitution, and one future that binds us.And when we come together and work together, there is no limit to the greatness of America. (APPLAUSE) Let me close with a word for the people of the state of Texas.We have known each other the longest, and you started me on this journey. On the open plains of Texas, I first learned the character of our country: sturdy and honest, and as hopeful as the break of day. I will always be grateful to the good people of my state. And whatever the road that lies ahead, that road will take me home. The campaign has ended, and the United States of America goes forward with confidence and faith.I see a great day coming for our country and I am eager for the work ahead. God bless you and may God bless America. "
bush,2008,"Laura and I are so honored so many came out to say hello. We appreciate it very much. I'm honored -- (applause.) We thank you for taking time out of your day. I've got something to tell you. I'm traveling Ohio a lot. I'm asking for the vote, and I'm asking for your help. (Applause.) We have a duty in this country to vote. You may have heard, the election is right around the corner. (Laughter.) And I'm asking, you get your friends and neighbors to go to the polls. Make sure our fellow Republicans vote. Make sure independents vote. Find some discerning Democrats, and there's a lot across the state of Ohio. (Applause.) And get them headed to the polls, and remind them, if they want a safer America, a stronger America, and a better  America, to put me and Dick Cheney back in office. (Applause.)One of the most important reasons why I think you ought to put me back into office is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Laura! Laura! Laura!THE PRESIDENT: I don't want to offend anybody who is follically challenged, but I admit my great Vice President doesn't have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) The people of Toledo will be proud to know that I didn't pick him because of his hairdo. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his judgment, his experience. He's getting the job done for the American people. (Applause.)I want to thank Senator Mike DeWine for joining us today. I'm proud to call him friend; you're proud to call him Senator. (Applause.) I urge you to put George Voinovich back in the United States Senate. (Applause.) I want to thank your Governor for joining us. I want to thank Paul Gillmor, Congressman Paul Gillmor, for being here today. (Applause.) I want to thank Betty Montgomery for joining us. And I want to thank the next congressman from the 9th congressional district, Larry Kaczala, for joining us. (Applause.)I want to thank the Wil Gravatt Band. I want to thank the Anthony Wayne High Marching Generals for being here. (Applause.) I will try to keep my speech short so you can get home and do your homework.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I want to thank the grassroots activists. I want to thank my friend, Bernadette Noy and Tom Noy for their leadership in Lucas County. (Applause.) I remember our breakfast. She had me flipping pancakes. (Laughter.)I want to thank those of you who are putting up the signs and making the phone calls. I want to thank those of you who are working long hours. We're almost there. Election day is almost here. I urge you to continue working to turn out that vote. With your help, we'll win Ohio again, and win a great victory. (Applause.)We've just got four days to go, and the voters have a clear choice between two very different candidates and different approaches and different records. You know where I stand. (Applause.) And sometimes, you even know where my opponent stands. (Laughter.) We both have records. I'm proudly running on mine. (Applause.) My opponent has an interesting idea of how to win friends. During this campaign, he's insulted our allies, and he questioned the good work of our troops in combat.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Earlier today, my opponent even insulted the American people saying, you need to -- quote -- ""wake up.""AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Well, the American people are awake. (Applause.) Their eyes are wide open. They are seeing more clearly every day the critical choices in this election: the Senator's failed out-of-the-mainstream policies, or my commitment to defend our country, to build our economy, and to uphold our bedrock values. (Applause.)This election comes down to some clear choices -- five clear choices for America's family. The first clear choice is the most important because it concerns the security of your family. All progress on every other issue depends on the safety of our citizens. This will be the first presidential election since September the 11th, 2001. Americans will go to the polls in a time of war and ongoing threats, unlike any we have faced before. The terrorists who killed thousands of innocent people are still dangerous, and they are determined.The outcome of this election will set the direction of the war against terror. The most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty or weakness during these troubling times, the world will drift toward tragedy. This is not going to happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning of September the 11th, we've fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear. We're strengthening the protections for our homeland. We're reforming our intelligence capabilities. We are transforming the all-volunteer army. There will be no draft. (Applause.) We are determined, we are relentless. We are staying on the offensive. We're chasing the terrorists overseas so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)Because we led, Afghanistan is a free nation and an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders. Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Because we led, Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice. (Applause.) We have led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)And part of our strategy is to spread liberty and peace. I believe in the transformational power of liberty to change societies. I want you to remind your sons and daughters what has taken place in a relatively quick period of time in Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago that young girls could not go to school, or their mothers were taken into the public square and whipped, and sometimes into a sports stadium and killed because of the barbaric vision of the Taliban. Because we acted in our self-interest, because we acted to uphold the doctrine which I laid out that said, if you harbor a terrorist, you're equally as guilty as the terrorist, millions of people -- (applause) -- millions of people in Afghanistan voted in a presidential election. The first voter was a 19-year-old woman. (Applause.)Free societies will be peaceful societies. Free societies will help us keep the peace. Iraq is going to have elections in January. Think how far that society has come from the days of mass graves and torture chambers. Freedom is on the march. I believe everybody years to be free. I believe people long for freedom. I believe this. I understand freedom is not America's gift to the world. Freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)A President -- a President must lead with consistency and strength. In a war, sometimes your tactics change, but not your principles. Americans have seen how I do my job. Even when you might not agree with me, you know what I believe, you know where I stand, and you know where I'm going to lead our nation. (Applause.) On good days and on bad days, when the polls are up or the polls are down, I am determined to protect the American people. (Applause.)And I'll support our troops in harm's way. You know, I want to thank those who wear our nation's uniform. I want to thank -- (applause.) I want to thank the military families who sacrifice on behalf of our nation's freedom. (Applause.) I want to thank the veterans who have set such a great example to those who wear the uniform. (Applause.) And I assure you, we will keep the commitment we have made. Our troops will have what they need to complete their missions.That's why I went to the Congress and asked for $87 billion of supplemental funding in September of 2003. And we received great bipartisan support for this necessary and critical funding. As a matter of fact, the support was so strong that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against the funding, two of whom were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: But let me give you a more -- a more startling statistic, one that I would hope you would use as you're gathering up the vote. Four members of the United States Senate, only four, voted to authorize the use of force and then voted against the funding necessary to support our troops in combat. Two of those four were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: So they asked him why he made that vote, and you might remember this quote. He said, ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it."" Now, look, I haven't spent all that much time in Toledo, but I doubt I'm going to find many people who talk that way here in Toledo, Ohio. (Applause.)He has given several answers about why he made the vote. Perhaps the most revealing was when he said the whole matter was a complicated matter. My fellow Americans, there is nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)Senator Kerry's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the Cold War, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Well, history has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong, and President Reagan was right. (Applause.)When former President Bush led a coalition against Saddam Hussein in 1991 because he had invaded Kuwait, Senator Kerry voted against the use of force to liberate Kuwait.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Well, history has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and former President Bush was right. (Applause.)In 1994, just one year after the first bombing of the World Trade Center, Senator Kerry proposed massive cuts in America's intelligence budget, so massive that even his Massachusetts colleague, Ted Kennedy, opposed them. (Laughter.) History shows that Senator Kerry was wrong -- and let's be fair about it -- Senator Kennedy was right. (Applause.)During the last 20 years in key moments of challenge and decision for America, Senator Kerry has chosen the position of weakness and inaction. With that record, he stands in opposition not just to me, but to the great tradition of the Democratic Party. The party of Franklin Roosevelt, the party of Harry Truman, the party of John Kennedy is rightly remembered for confidence and resolve in times of war and hours of crisis. Senator Kerry has turned his back on ""pay any price"" and ""bear any burden,"" and he's replaced those commitments with ""wait and see"" and ""cut and run.""Many Democrats in this country do not recognize their party anymore. And today, I want to speak to every one of them. If you believe that America should lead with strength and purpose and confidence in our ideals, I would be honored to have your support, and I'm asking for your vote. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: In this campaign, there are big differences about how to protect America's families. One time in our debate, my opponent said America must submit to what he calls a global test before we commit force.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I'm not making that up. (Laughter.) I heard it. (Laughter.) As far as I can tell, that means our country must get permission before we act in our own defense. As President, I'll always work with friends and allies. I'll always build coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)My opponent says that September the 11th did not change him much at all. And that's clear in his policies. He believes that the war on terror is primarily a law enforcement and intelligence-gathering operation. September the 11th changed me. I remember that day when I was at Ground Zero on September the 14th, 2001. I'll never forget the sights; I'll never forget the sounds. I remember the workers in hard hats yelling at me at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes. I remember the first responder -- I can't remember if he was a firefighter or a policeman -- who came out of the rubble, and he grabbed me by the arm and he looked me square in the eye, and he said, ""Do not let me down."" Ever since that day, I've gotten up every morning thinking about how to better protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)The second clear choice in this election concerns your family budget. When I ran for President four years ago, I pledged to lower taxes for American families. And I kept my word. (Applause.) We doubled the child credit to a thousand dollars per child. We want to help the moms and dads of America do their duty. We reduced the marriage penalty. We believe the tax code ought to encourage marriage, not penalize marriage. (Applause.) We dropped the lowest bracket to 10 percent. We reduced income taxes for everybody who pays taxes. Real after-tax income is up 10 percent since I've been the President. That's money in your pocket. That's money you can spend. (Applause.)I want you to remind your friends and neighbors that the stock market was in serious decline six months prior to my arrival in Washington. And then we had a recession. And we had some corporate scandals. We passed tough laws; we have made it abundantly clear we will not tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of America. (Applause.)The attacks of September the 11th cost us nearly a million jobs in the three months after that attack. But our economic policies are working. They have led us back to the path of growth and recovery. Our economy is growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. We've added 1.9 million new jobs in the last 13 months. Home ownership rates are at an all-time high. Minorities are owning their home at rates than ever before in our history. (Applause.) Farm income is up. The entrepreneurial spirit is strong in America. Small businesses are flourishing. The national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent. Let me put that in perspective for you. That's lower than the average rate of the 1970s, the 1980s and the 1990s. (Applause.)I know people are still struggling here in Ohio. I understand that. I've traveled your state a lot; I've spoken to people. But that doesn't mean we should get away from pro-growth economic policies. Quite the contrary. We need to keep your taxes low. We need to do something about lawsuits. We need to do something about regulatory reform. To keep this economy going, I will empower our small businesses, our consumers, and American families by keeping the taxes low. (Applause.)Speaking about taxes, my opponent has got some plans for your budget --he's going to take a big chunk out of it. He voted against the higher -- the higher child tax credit, and he voted against the marriage penalty relief, he voted against lower taxes. If he'd have had his way, the average middle-class family would be paying $2,000 more a year in taxes.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That's probably not a lot for some of the folks in Washington. It's a lot for the folks in Toledo, Ohio. That means a lot to the people in this part of the world. (Applause.) That means a lot to the people in this part of the world. That money helps moms and dads. It helps our families.You know, he's been in the United States Senate for 20 years and he's -- and he's voted to raise taxes 98 times. That's five times for every year he's been in the Senate. I would call that a predictable pattern -- (laughter) -- a leading indicator. (Laughter.) When a senator does something that often, he really must like it. (Laughter.) And he's proposed $2.2 trillion in new spending -- that is trillion with a ""T."" That's a lot. That's a lot even for a senator from Massachusetts. (Laughter.)So they asked him how he's going to pay for it. He said, well, he's going to tax the rich. You know, by raising the top two brackets, you're taxing small business creators. Most small businesses pay tax at the individual income tax rate. Seventy percent of new jobs in America are created by small businesses. It makes no sense to tax the job creators in America. Running up the tax is lousy economic policy. (Applause.)Let me tell you what else is wrong -- and you need to tell this to your friends and neighbors. He's proposed $2.2 trillion in new spending, but when you raise the top two brackets, you only raise between $600 billion and $800 billion. So there's a gap. I would like to call it a tax gap, a gap between what he's promised and what he can pay. And guess who usually fills the tax gap.AUDIENCE: We do!THE PRESIDENT: You do. The good news is, we're not going to let him tax you. We're going to carry Ohio and win on November the 2nd. (Applause.)The third clear choice -- the third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our families. A good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. As a candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. (Applause.) We passed strong education reforms in Washington. We're increasing spending, particularly for low-income students. But in return for increased spending, we're now asking whether or not a child can read or write and add and subtract. See, we realize -- or we think every child can learn, and we expect every school to teach.You cannot solve a problem unless you diagnose the problem, and we are diagnosing and solving problems all across America. Our test scores in reading and math are up. We are closing an achievement gap for minority students all across America, and we're not going to go back to the old days of mediocrity and low expectations in our nation's schoolrooms. (Applause.)We will continue to work to make sure health care is available and affordable. We'll make sure health care is available by expanding community health centers so the poor and the indigent can get good primary and preventative care in places other than your emergency rooms. We're going to make sure that children of low-income families are subscribed to our health programs. We want to make sure people get health care in America that can't afford it. We also want to make sure it's affordable. Most of the uninsured work for small businesses. Small businesses ought to be allowed to join together, to spread risk, so they can buy insurance at the same discount that big companies are able to do. (Applause.)We will expand health savings accounts, which will help our families and our small businesses. And to make sure health care is available and affordable in this good state, we will do something about the frivolous lawsuits that are running up the cost of health care and running doctors out of business. (Applause.)I was campaigning in Canton the other day, and I met two docs who are no longer practicing medicine because their premiums got so high because of the lawsuits. I have met too many OB/GYNs who are leaving practice because of the lawsuits. And I have met too many young expectant moms who are concerned about their health care because they don't have a doc close by. And that's not right for America. This is a national problem that requires a national solution. You cannot be pro-doctor, pro-patient and pro-personal injury trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) My opponent has made his choice. He voted against medical liability reform ten times in the Senate, and he put a personal injury trial lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I have made my choice. I'm standing with the doctors of Ohio, I'm standing with the patients of Ohio, I'm standing with the families of Ohio. I'm for medical liability reform. (Applause.)My opponent has got a different point of view when it comes to health care. You might remember one of the debates when they asked him about his health care plan, and he said, with a straight face, the government doesn't have anything to do with it. I could barely contain myself. (Laughter.) The government has got a lot to do with it. Eighty percent of the people would be signed up to a government program under his vision. When you make it easier for people to sign up for Medicaid, it means the small business owners will stop writing insurance for their employees because the government is going to. That moves people from the private sector to the public sector. Now, when the government starts writing the checks when it comes to health care, they start making the rules when it comes to health care. And when they start making the rules when it comes to health care, they start making the decisions for you when it comes to health care. And they make decisions for your doctors when it comes to health care. The wrong prescription for American families is to federalize health care. (Applause.)In all we do to improve health care for our families, we'll make sure the decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by officials in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)The fourth clear choice in this election involves your retirement. Our nation has made a solemn commitment to America's seniors on Social Security and Medicare. When I ran for President four years ago, I promised to keep that commitment and improve Medicare by adding prescription drugs. I kept my word. (Applause.)We got the job done for our seniors. Medicare needed to be modernized. Medicare would pay thousands of dollars for a heart surgery, but not one dime for the prescription drugs that might prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. That didn't make any sense to people on Medicare. And so I brought Republicans together and Democrats together. I signed a Medicare law. And beginning in 2006, all seniors will be able to get prescription drug coverage under Medicare. And we will keep our promise of Social Security for our seniors. And we'll strengthen Social Security for generations to come.Now, you might remember the 2000 campaign, when they were running the ads and the fliers and the mailers that said if George W. gets elected, our seniors will not get their checks. Well, as you gather up the vote, please remind your friends and neighbors that George W. did get elected, and the seniors got their checks. (Applause.) And the seniors will continue to get their checks. And baby boomers like me, and a couple other people I see out there, we'll get our checks. But we need to worry about our children and our grandchildren. We need to worry about whether the Social Security system will be there when they need it. And that's why I believe younger workers ought to be able to take some of their own payroll taxes and set up a personal savings account, a personal savings account that will earn a better rate of return, a personal savings account they call their own, a personal savings account the government cannot take away. (Applause.)My opponent's taken a different approach on this issue. He said he's going to protect Social Security. I want you to remind your friends and neighbors that he has voted eight times for higher taxes on Social Security benefits. He can run from his record, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)And when it comes to the young generation, he's offered nothing. The job of a President is to confront problems, not pass them on to future generations and future Presidents. In a new term, I'll bring people together and make sure the Social Security system is strong for generations to come. (Applause.)The fifth clear choice in this election is on the values that are so crucial to keeping our families strong. I stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.) I stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) I will promote a culture of life and I proudly signed the ban on partial birth abortion. (Applause.)My opponent's taken a different point of view. He voted against the Defense of Marriage Act. He voted against the ban on partial birth abortion.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And at one time in this campaign, he actually said the heart and soul of America can be found in Hollywood.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Most families do not look to Hollywood as a source of values. The heart and soul of America is found in caring communities like Toledo, Ohio. (Applause.)All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country are at stake. The health and education for our families and our children are at stake. The direction of our culture is at stake. The decision is in the best of hands. It's in the hands of the American people. (Applause.) It's in your hands.Our country is a strong country. It is a great country. (Applause.) I see a great day coming for all Americans. One of my favorite quotes is from a fellow Texan named Tom Lea. And he said, ""Sarah and I live on the east side of the mountain. It is the sunrise side, not the sunset side. It is the side to see the day that is coming, not to see the day that is gone."" In the course of this campaign, my opponent has spent much of the campaign talking about the day that is gone. I'm talking about the day that is coming -- (applause) -- a prosperous day, a hopeful day, a compassionate day, and a day when we can achieve the peace we so long for for our children and our grandchildren.When I campaigned across Ohio four years ago, I made this pledge, that if I was elected, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office. With your help, with your hard work, I will do so for four more years.Thanks for coming. God bless. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all for coming. (Applause.) You know, it is such a beautiful day in Flag City, I think I'll just take off my jacket. (Applause.) And stay a while. (Applause.) Thanks for coming out. You are lifting our spirits. We're honored you're here. (Applause.) And Laura and I have come with the great Senator from Georgia to not only ask for your vote, but to ask for your help. (Applause.) We need your help coming down the stretch to get your friends  and neighbors to go to the polls.We have a duty in our democracy to vote. We have an obligation to vote. So I'm asking you to tell your friends and neighbors about that obligation. Get our Republicans to go out there. Get independents to go out there. And find those discerning Democrats like Zell Miller and head them to the polls. And when you get them to the polls, remind them, if they want a safer America and a stronger America and a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney back in office. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: I have been traveling your state a lot. (Applause.) And I enjoy it. (Applause.) I have had a chance to say hello to a lot of the citizens from Ohio. And I've been telling them why they ought to put me back in office. But perhaps the most important reason why I ought to have four more years is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.) I'm sure some will be able to relate to this story. You know, Laura and I went to the 7th grade together in San Jacinto Junior High in Midland, Texas. We became reacquainted. She was a public school librarian, and when I asked her to marry me, she said, fine, but make me a promise. I said, okay, what is it? She said, promise me I'll never have to give a political speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you got a deal. Fortunately, she did not hold me to that promise. She is giving a lot of speeches, and when she does, the American people see a warm, compassionate, strong First Lady. (Applause.)I'm looking around. I see some people out there who are follically challenged. (Laughter.) And think about that, it reminds me of my Vice President. (Laughter.) Dick Cheney is a great Vice President. He does not have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) But you all will be pleased to hear, I didn't pick him because of his hairdo. (Applause.) I picked him because of his judgment; I picked him because of his experience; I picked him because he's getting the job done for the American people. (Applause.)It's a joy to travel with my friend, Zell Miller. He's strong, he is courageous, he puts party aside and puts his country first. And for that, I am grateful. (Applause.)I call him, Ox, you call him, Congressman. Mike Oxley is as fine as they are in the House of Representatives. He's a good man, and I appreciate his service. (Applause.) And I want to thank his wife, Pat, for joining us, as well. And I am proud to be up here, or close by, with the fine United States Senate Michael DeWine. He's doing a good job for the people of Ohio, as is George Voinovich. Make sure you put George back in. (Applause.) And I appreciate Fran DeWine joining us.I want to thank Congressman Paul Gillmore for being here today. I want to thank your Governor, Bob Taft, for joining us today. Mr. Governor, I appreciate your service to the state of Ohio. I want to thank Jennette Bradley for joining us today, the Lieutenant Governor of the state of Ohio. I appreciate Mayor Iriti for joining us today. Mr. Mayor, you didn't ask me for any advice, but I'm going to give you some: Fill the potholes. (Applause.) Mayor Iriti is a good man, and I appreciate him being here, and I want to thank you, Mr. Mayor, for serving. I want to thank all the other state and local officials.I want to thank the Findlay High School Marching Band for joining us. (Applause.) I want to thank Wil Gravatt Band for joining us today.Most of all, I want to thank you all. I want to thank the grassroots activists, the people who are putting up the signs, the people making the phone calls, the people who have worked so hard to make this rally such a successful rally. I want to thank you for what you have done, and I want to thank you for what you are going to do, which is turn out that vote. (Applause.) And with your help, there is no doubt in my mind, we'll carry Ohio again and win a great victory on November the 2nd. (Applause.)This election comes down to some clear choices for America's families, choices on issues of great consequence. The first clear choice is the most important because it concerns the security of your family. All progress on every other issue depends on the safety of our citizens. This will be the first presidential election since September the 11th, 2001. Americans will go to the polls in a time of war and of ongoing threat unlike any we have faced before. The terrorists who kill thousands of innocent people are still dangerous, and they are determined to strike. The outcome of this election will set the direction of the war against terror. The most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear: We have strengthened the protections for the homeland. We're reforming our intelligence capabilities. We're transforming the United States military. We will keep the all-volunteer army an all-volunteer army. There will be no draft. (Applause.) We are relentless, we are determined, we are staying on the offensive so we do not have to face these terrorists here at home. (Applause.)And we're spreading freedom and liberty. Some amazing things have happened in a short period of time. I want the youngsters here to understand what has happened in the world. In Afghanistan, three-and-a-half years ago, young girls couldn't go to school. And if their mothers did not toe the line of the ideologues of hate who ran that country, they were whipped in the public square, sometimes executed in a sports stadium. We acted to defend ourselves. We upheld the doctrine that said, if you harbor a terrorist, you're equally as guilty as the terrorist. And in so doing -- and in so doing, we liberated people from the clutches of those barbaric people called the Taliban. Millions of people went to vote in a presidential election. The first voter was a 19-year-old woman. Freedom is on the march. (Applause.)It's never easy to go from tyranny to liberty, but that's where we're headed. There will be elections in Iraq. Think how far that country has come from the days of mass graves and torture chambers. I believe everybody in the world yearns to be free. I believe people deep in their soul want to live in a free society. I believe that because freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)A President must lead with consistency and strength. In a war, sometimes you have to change your tactics, but never your principles. (Applause.) Americans have seen how I do my job. Even when you might not agree with me, you know what I believe, you know where I stand, and you know what I intend to do. (Applause.) On good days and on bad days, whether the polls are up or the polls are down, I will do everything we can do to defend the American people and win this war against the terrorists. (Applause.) And I will always support the men and women who wear our nation's uniform. (Applause.)We have got a great United States military. (Applause.) And I am proud to be their Commander-in-Chief. I want to thank the families of those who wear our nation's uniform. I want to thank you for your sacrifices. I want to thank the veterans who are here today for having set such a great example for those who wear the uniform. (Applause.) As I've told families all across this country, we will make sure your loved ones have the support necessary to complete their missions.And that's why I went to the United States Congress and asked for $87 billion of supplemental funding in September of 2003, necessary funding, important funding, to support our troops in harm's way. And we received good support for that. As a matter of fact, the support was so strong that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against funding for our troops, two of whom were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, I would like for you to share this startling statistic with your friends and neighbors as you get them going to the polls: There were only four members of the United States Senate, four out of a hundred, that voted to authorize the use of force and then voted against supporting our troops in harm's way. And two of those four were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, you might remember his -- Senator Kerry's explanation about that vote. He said, I actually did vote for the $87 billion right before I voted against it. Now, I haven't spent much time in the coffee shops of Findlay, but I suspect you're not going to find many people in this part of the world who talk that way.They kept pressing him about it. He's given four or five different explanations about the vote. One of the most interesting ones of all that speaks to my opponent, said, well, the whole thing was just a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in harm's way. (Applause.)After repeatedly calling Iraq the wrong war and a diversion, Senator Kerry, this week, seemed shocked to learn that Iraq was a dangerous place full of dangerous weapons. (Laughter.) The Senator used to know that, even though he seems to have forgotten it over the course of the campaign. But that's why we went there. See, Iraq was a dangerous place run by a dangerous tyrant who hated the United States. And he had a lot of weapons. And we've seized or destroyed more than 400,000 tons of munitions, including explosives at thousands of sites. And we're continuing to round up weapons nearly every day.Now, I want to remind you all, If Senator Kerry had had his way, we would still be taking our global test.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And Saddam Hussein would still be in power, and he would control all those weapons and explosives and could have shared them with a terrorist enemy. Now, the Senator is making wild charges about missing explosives. One of his top foreign policy advisors admits he doesn't know the facts. He said, ""I don't know the truth."" End quote. Well, think about that. The Senator is denigrating the actions of our troops and commanders in the field without knowing the facts. Our military is now investigating a number of possible scenarios, including that the explosives may have been moved before our troops even arrived at the site. This investigation is important and it is ongoing. And a political candidate who jumps to conclusions without knowing the facts is not the person you want as the Commander-in-Chief. (Applause.)Unfortunately, that is part of a pattern. My opponent is throwing out the wild claim that he knows where bin Laden was in the fall of 2001, and that our military passed up a chance to get him at Tora Bora. You might remember that. He kept repeating that in the debates. Well, this is unjustified criticism of our military commanders in the field. This is the kind of -- worse kind of Monday-morning quarterbacking, what we've come to expect from him, however. In fact, our commander in Afghanistan, General Tommy Franks, recently wrote this about Tora Bora: ""The Senator's understanding of events does not square with reality."" He went on to say, the General says, ""American Special Forces were actively involved in the search for the terrorists at Tora Bora,"" and that ""intelligence reports at the time place bin Laden in any of several countries."" That's what Tommy Franks, who knew what he's talking about, said.Poor Senator Kerry got into political difficulty and revised his views. He saw our actions in Tora Bora differently. In the fall of 2001, on national television, he said this about Tora Bora: ""I think we've been doing this pretty effectively, and we should continue to do it that way."" At the time the Senator said about Tora Bora: ""I think we have been smart. I think the administration leadership has done it well and we are on the right track."" End quote. All I can say is that I am George W. Bush and I approve of that message. (Applause.)The security of our families is vital, and it's important to our people of this country to understand the records. Senator Kerry's record on national security has the far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the Cold War, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right. (Applause.)When former President Bush led a coalition against Saddam Hussein in 1991, Senator Kerry voted against the use of forces to liberate Kuwait. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and former President Bush was right. (Applause.)In 1994, just one year after the first bombing of the World Trade Center, Senator Kerry proposed massive cuts in America's intelligence budget, so massive that even his Massachusetts colleague, Ted Kennedy, opposed them. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong, and -- we have got to be fair -- that Senator Kennedy was right. (Applause.)During the last 20 years, in key moments of challenge and decision for America, Senator Kerry has chosen the position of weakness and inaction. With that record, he stands in opposition not just to me, but to the great tradition of the Democratic Party. The party of Franklin Roosevelt, the party of Harry Truman, the party of John Kennedy is rightly remembered for confidence and resolve in times of war and hours of crisis. Senator Kerry has turned his back on ""pay any price"" and ""bear any burden,"" and he has replaced those commitments with ""wait and see,"" and ""cut and run.""Many Democrats in this country do not recognize their party anymore. And traveling Ohio, I want to speak to every one of them. If you believe that America should lead with strength and purpose and confidence in our ideals, I would be honored to have your support, and I'm asking for your vote. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: The second -- the second clear choice in this election concerns your family's budget. When I ran for President four years ago, I pledged to lower taxes for American families, and I kept my word. (Applause.) We doubled the child credit to $1,000 per child to help our families. We reduced the marriage penalty. I believe the tax code ought to encourage marriage, not penalize marriage. (Applause.) We dropped the lowest bracket to 10 percent, we reduced income taxes for everybody that pays income taxes. After-tax income, that's money in your pocket. It's gone up by about 10 percent since I became your President.And I want you to remind your friends and neighbors, when you're out there getting people to the polls, what this economy has been through. Six months prior to my arrival, the stock market was in serious decline. Then we had a recession. Then we had corporate scandals. But we passed what's called the Sarbanes-Oxley bill, a bill that makes it abundantly clear that we will not tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of America. (Applause.) And I want to thank Congressman Oxley for authoring this legislation.And then we got attacked on September the 11th. Those attacks cost us about a million jobs in the three months after that fateful day. But our economic policies have led us back to growth. Our economy is growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. Home ownership in America is at an all-time high. (Applause.) We saw a lot of good farmland, flying in today. The farm incomes are up all across America. (Applause.) Our small businesses are flourishing. The entrepreneurial spirit is strong. We've added 1.9 million new jobs since August of 2003. The national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent. Let me put that in perspective for you: That's lower than the average rate of the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.)I know there are placed hurting here in Ohio. I've traveled into those neighborhoods. I've talked about an economic plan to continue growth. But I want to remind you that just last month, the unemployment rate in the state of Ohio went from 6.3 percent to 6 percent, and this great state added 5,500 new jobs in one month. We're on the move. We're moving forward. (Applause.)My opponent has very different plans for your budget. He's going to take a big chunk out of it.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He voted against the child tax credit; he voted against marriage penalty relief; he voted against lower taxes. And if his way had prevailed, the average family in America would have been paying $2,000 more in taxes to the federal government.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That may not seem like a lot to folks in Washington; it means a lot to people in Finley, Ohio. (Applause.)He served in the United States Senate for 20 years, and he's voted for higher taxes 98 times. That's five times every year he served in the Senate. I would call that a predictable pattern -- (laughter) -- a reliable indicator. (Laughter.) When a senator does something that often, he must really enjoy it. (Laughter.) Around the campaign, he's been promising $2.2 trillion in new federal spending -- that's trillion with a ""T."" That's a lot, even for a senator from Massachusetts. (Laughter.)So they asked him, how are you going to pay for it? And he said that same old, tired line you've heard over and over again: We're going to tax the rich. Well, there's a problem with that. When you're run up the top two brackets, you only raise between $600 billion and $800 billion. That's far short of the $2.2 trillion he has promised. I would call that a tax gap. And guess who gets to usually fill that tax gap.AUDIENCE: We do!THE PRESIDENT: You do. The good news is we're going to carry Ohio and we're not going to let him tax you. (Applause.)The third choice in this election involves the quality of life for our nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important for your future. As a candidate, I pledged to end the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. (Applause.) We passed a really good piece of reform legislation. We're raising the standards. We've increased federal spending, but now we're asking for results. We want to measure. See, you can't solve a problem unless you diagnose the problem. And we're diagnosing problems all across America and we're beginning to solve them. Our test scores in reading and math are up. We're closing achievement gaps for minority students all across America. We'll build on these reforms and extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in our country. (Applause.)We'll continue to improve life for our families by making health care more affordable and accessible. We'll make sure the poor and the indigent get health care in what's called community health centers. We'll make sure our low-income -- our program for low-income -- children in low-income families is fully subscribed so they get health care. To make sure health care is affordable, we'll help our small businesses. We'll allow them to pool together so they can spread risk and buy insurance at the same discounts big companies are able to do. (Applause.)We will expand health savings accounts, which will help our families and small business owners. Let me tell you what else we need to do. We need to do something about these frivolous lawsuits that are running up the cost of medicine and running good doctors out of practice. (Applause.)I was in Canton the other day talking to a OB/GYN who got run out of business because these lawsuits made her premiums too high to practice medicine. And I met too many citizens not only in your state, but across the country -- too many moms, expectant moms, who are worried about their health care and the health care of their baby because these lawsuits have made OB/GYN care more scarce. This is a national problem. You cannot be pro-doctor, pro-patient, and pro-plaintiff injury attorney at the same time. You've got to make a choice. My opponent made his choice and he put a personal injury trial lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I have made my choice. I'm standing with the doctors of Ohio, I'm standing with the patients of Ohio. I'm for medical liability reform now. (Applause.)In one of our debates, my opponent looked straight in the camera when they asked him about his health care plan, he said, ""the government doesn't have anything to do with it."" I'll be frank with you, I could barely contain myself. The government has got a lot to do with his plan. Eighty percent of the people who sign up on his plan would end up on the government. See, if you make it easier for people to sign up for Medicaid, it means small businesses are likely not to provide insurance for their employees because the government will provide insurance for their employees. That's logical. And when the government starts writing the checks, the government starts making the rules. And when it comes to health care when the government's making the rules, the government starts making decisions for you and decisions for your doctor. The wrong prescription for health care in America is to increase the role of the federal government. (Applause.)In all we do to improve health care, we'll make sure the decisions are made by patients and doctors, not by officials in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)The fourth clear choice in this election comes to your retirement. Our nation has made a solemn commitment to America's seniors on Social Security and Medicare. When I ran for President four years ago, I promised to keep that commitment and improve Medicare by adding prescription drug coverage. I kept my word. (Applause.) We have modernized Medicare for our seniors. Beginning in 2006, all seniors will be able to get prescription drug coverage under Medicare. (Applause.)And we'll keep our promise for Social Security for our seniors and we will strengthen Social Security for generations to come. I remember the campaign in 2000. I remember those ads they were running. You might remember them. They said if George W. gets elected, the seniors are not going to get their checks. They may be doing it again this year. I want you to remind your friends and neighbors as you get them to the polls that George W. did get elected, and our seniors did get their checks. (Applause.) And our seniors will continue to get their checks. Nobody's going to take away your check.Baby boomers like me, we're in pretty good shape when it comes to the Social Security trust. We'll probably get our checks. But we need to worry about our children and our grandchildren. We need to worry about whether or not the Social Security system will be there for them when they retire. That's why I believe younger workers ought to be able to take some of their own money -- some of their own payroll taxes, and put it in a personal savings account, an account they call their own, an account the government cannot take away. (Applause.)Now, my opponent takes a different approach. He says he's going to strengthen Social Security, he's going to protect it. But you might remember, he is the only candidate in this race who has voted eight times for higher taxes on Social Security benefits.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He doesn't like talking about that. He can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)And he offered nothing for the younger generation in terms of reform. The job of a President is to confront problems, not to pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. In a new term, I will bring Republicans and Democrats together to strengthen the Social Security system for generations to come. (Applause.)And the final -- the final choice in this election is on the values that are so crucial to keeping our families strong. And here, my opponent and I are miles apart. I stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.) I believe marriage is a sacred commitment -- (applause) -- a pillar of our civilization, and I will defend it. This is not a partisan issue. When Congress passed the Defense of Marriage Act, defining marriage as a union of a man and a woman, the vast majority of Democrats supported it, and President Bill Clinton signed it into law. But Senator Kerry was part of an out-of-the-mainstream minority that voted against the Defense of Marriage Act.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I believe that reasonable people can find common ground on difficult issues. Republicans and Democrats came together and agreed we should ban the brutal practice of partial birth abortion. (Applause.) I proudly signed that bill. (Applause.) But Senator Kerry was part of an out-of-the-mainstream minority that voted against the ban.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He voted against parental notification laws, and against the Unborn Victims of Violence Act. I will continue to reach out to Americans of every belief and move this good-hearted nation toward a culture of life. (Applause.)At one point in this campaign, you might remember this, my opponent said that the heart and soul of America can be found in Hollywood.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Most American families do not look toward -- to Hollywood as a source of values. The heart and soul of America is found in communities like Flag City, Ohio. (Applause.)All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country, the health and education of our families, the retirement of our citizens, and the direction of our culture are all at stake. And the decision is in the best of hands. It is in the hands of the American people. (Applause.) It is in your hands. You get to decide. And that gives me great confidence. See, I'm optimistic about this country and our future. One of my favorite quotes is from a fellow Texan named Tom Lea. He said this: He said, ""Sarah and I live on the east side of the mountain. It is the sunrise side, not the sunset side. It is the side to see the day that is coming, not to see the day that is gone."" During the course of this campaign, my opponent has spent much of his campaign talking about the day that is gone. I'm talking about the day that's coming. (Applause.)We've been through a lot together. We have been through a lot together during the last nearly four years. Because we've done the hard work of climbing the mountain, we can see the valley below. The next four years, we'll work to protect our families, build our prosperity, and defend our values. We will work hard to spread freedom and liberty so we can achieve the peace we want for generations to come.Four years ago, when I traveled your great state asking for the vote, I made you this pledge, that if I was elected to the office I hold, I would uphold the honor and its dignity. With your help, with your hard work, I will do so for four more years. Thanks for coming. God bless. Thank you all. Thanks for coming. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all. What a great way to spend a Tuesday, and that's to be on a bus traveling throughout the great state of Wisconsin. (Applause.) Thank you all for coming out to say ""hello."" It's such an honor to be here. Laura and I are -- our spirits are lifted up because so many have come out to say ""hello."" We're honored you are here. I'm here to ask for your vote. I'm here to ask for your help. There's no doubt in my mind if we turn out our vote in Wisconsin, we'll win a great  victory on November the 2nd. (Applause.)I don't know if you know the history of -- of me and Laura. We were in the 7th grade together in San Jacinto Junior High, in Midland, Texas. And then we became reacquainted years later, when she was a public school librarian. And I asked her to marry me -- I'm sure some of you can relate to this. She said, fine, but make me a promise. I said, what is it? Well, promise me I'll never have to give a political speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you've got a deal. (Laughter.) Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that promise. She's giving a lot of speeches, and when she does the American people see a warm, compassionate, great First Lady. (Applause.)I have been -- I have been traveling your state a lot talking about the reasons why I think people ought to put me back into office. But perhaps the most important one is so that Laura will be First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)I am proud of my running mate, Dick Cheney. (Applause.) In all due respect to those who are here who are folically challenged -- (laughter) -- I readily concede my running mate does not have the waviest hair in the race. You'll be pleased to know I did not pick him because of his hairdo. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his experience and his judgment and his ability to get the job done. (Applause.)And I'm proud of your friend, Tommy Thompson. He has done a great job. (Applause.) I gave him one of the toughest jobs in Washington, D.C., and he has responded. He has done a fabulous job to help those who hurt. (Applause.) Just take the issue of Medicare. Tommy and I went to Washington to solve problems, not to pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. That's our job, to tackle the tough problems. Medicare was a problem. See, Medicare hadn't changed, but medicine had. For example, they pay nearly $100,000 for heart surgery, but not one dime for the prescription drugs that could prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. Tommy recognized that wasn't fair, I recognized it wasn't fair. We brought Republicans and Democrats together. We did what other Presidents and other Secretaries couldn't do -- we modernized Medicare, and starting in 2006, our seniors will get prescription drug coverage. (Applause.)Let me say one other thing to our seniors here in Wisconsin. You might remember the 2000 campaign, when they ran those ads that said: If George W. gets elected, our seniors are not going to get their Social Security checks. Remember those? Yes. Well, I want you, as you're gathering up the vote, remind your friends and neighbors that George W. did get elected and our seniors did get their Social Security check. (Applause.) And our seniors will continue to get their Social Security checks. But we're also going to strengthen Social Security for our younger generation. Our youngsters ought to be allowed to take some of their payroll taxes and set up a personal savings account they call their own, an account the government cannot take away. (Applause.)I want to thank Congressman Mark Green, who is with us today. Congressman, I appreciate you coming. He's a fine, good, young member of the House of Representatives. (Applause.) I want to thank the Mayor of Onalaska with us today. Mr. Mayor, I'm proud you're here. Thanks for coming. Fill the potholes. (Laughter and applause.)I'm proud to be standing with the next United States senator from Wisconsin, Tim Michels. (Applause.) He married a lady named Barbara. (Laughter.) I know some Barbaras. (Laughter.) One of them is still telling me what to do. (Laughter and applause.) And I'm still listening, I want you to know. (Applause.)I'm very impressed by a candidate for Wisconsin's 3rd congressional district, a man I hope you support, the next congressman, Dale Schultz. (Applause.)I want to thank the grassroots activists who are here, the people who are putting up the signs, making the phone calls, the people who helped turn out such a huge crowd here. I'm honored to have your support. (Applause.) Now is the time to keep the work up. Now is the time to find every single voter, and tell them we have a duty -- a duty in this country to vote. When you get them headed to the polls, remind them if they want a safer America, a stronger America, and a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney back in office. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We are -- we're only one week away from the vote -- (applause) -- and I'm focusing on the big issues that are facing our -- our country's families. This election comes down to five clear choices for our families: your family's security, your family's budget, your quality of life, your retirement, and the bedrock values that are so critical to our country's future. (Applause.)First and foremost -- (applause) -- I've talked about the quality retirement when I'm talking about Medicare and making sure it exists and strong, that helps our families. When I'm talking about Social Security and making sure it's around today, as well as around tomorrow, that helps our families. But the first biggest concern of any President is your security. Our nation is at war against the terrorist enemy unlike any we have faced before. The most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.)We will be relentless, determined, steadfast, and strong. We will not relent. We will stay on the offensive until the fight is won. (Applause.)Another big issue, of course, is our economy. It affects the quality of life. It affects your budget. It affects how much money you have in your wallet. We will expand and strengthen our economic recovery to make sure opportunity spreads throughout every corner of this country. This campaign offers a clear choice when it comes to the economy and our vision for how to create jobs. My policies support and strengthen the small businesses, which are creating most new jobs in America. (Applause.)I'm going to spend a little time talking about the vision of enhancing the entrepreneurial spirit. My opponent promises to raise your taxes.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And, unfortunately, for our small business owners, that's a promise most politicians tend to keep. (Laughter.) Our economy has been through a lot. When you're out there rounding up the vote, I want you to remind people that six months prior to my arrival, the stock market was in serious decline. Our economy was declining in the last half of the year 2000. We fell into a recession. We had corporate scandals, which affected our economy. By the way, we passed tough laws. We have made it abundantly clear, we will not tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of America. (Applause.)We were attacked. And those attacks cost us about a million jobs in the three months after September the 11th. But, see, I understand something. I understand the engine of growth that this economy has found with the entrepreneurs and workers of America. And that's why we passed the largest tax relief in a generation, tax relief which encouraged consumption and investment. (Applause.)And it's working. The economic stimulus plan we passed is working. This country created about 1.9 million jobs in the last 13 months. The national unemployment rate is down to 5.4 percent. And let me remind you of where that stands: that's lower than the average rate of the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.) The unemployment rate in Wisconsin is down to 5 percent. That is down almost a full point since the summer of 2003. We're headed in the right direction in America. (Applause.)Our farmers are doing well. Farm income is up, and that's good for our economy. (Applause.) The home ownership rate is at an all-time high in America. (Applause.) We're on the move. We're going forward, and we're not going to go back to the days of tax and spend. (Applause.)This is a time of fantastic opportunity. The job of government is to create an environment in which the entrepreneurial spirit can flourish, in which people are willing to work hard to realize their dreams. Government doesn't create wealth. Government creates the environment that says, take the risk, start a business if you choose to, own something.Today Joan Shelley is with us. I want you to hear her story. Joan is right there. First of all, she is a mom. She and her husband have got eight children. (Applause.) Listen to her story. She didn't think she was spending enough time -- she worked as a nurse -- didn't spend enough time at home. First of all, she's got her priorities straight. (Applause.) If you are fortunate enough to be a mom or a dad, your most important responsibility is to love your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.)So guess what happened? Six years ago, she decided to start an on-line business selling cabinet hardware from the basement of her home. How many times have you heard that story? You know, I sat around the kitchen table and came up with an idea and started a business; I started a business in my garage; she started hers in her basement. Today, KnobGallery employs 20 people -- (applause) -- most of them moms who wanted more flexibility for their families. This administration believes in flex time. The world has changed. Our labor laws ought to change with them. Moms and dads ought to be able to have the flex time in the work place so they can balance family and the need to work. (Applause.)KnobGallery is a thriving, $1.4 million business. Her family is working in the business: Kristina turns out -- designs the company's web page. Joan is living the American Dream. She has started her own business. She owns her own company. And she -- I said, are you going to increase the jobs? She said, I'm intending to add more people to work. See, the more Joans that start up their own business, the more likely that somebody is going to find a job in America. The role of the government is to create an environment for the Joan Shelleys to feel comfortable in starting and expanding their business. (Applause.)Ric Hartman is with us. There he is -- hi, Ric. He managed at one time the in-house design shop of a large packaging firm for 15 years. Last October, about a year ago, he learned the company was going to close his operation. So guess what he did? He got some of the people he worked with, put them in a van, went to a local flower mill and said, this is where we're going to start a new company. See, the entrepreneurial spirit must be strong if America is going to be a hopeful place. Five came with him. Today, he runs a profitable small business called Hartman Design.Here's what he said, ""Deep down, I think every design person wants to run their own shop."" Deep down a lot of people in America want to run their own shop. Deep down people have a desire to start their own business, and when they do, somebody is more likely to find a job. (Applause.)A hopeful America and one that's good for your budget is one in which small businesses are thriving, in which people from all walks of life feel comfortable about starting their own business. Do you realize minority businesses are up in America? That is hopeful and positive for the future of this country. (Applause.) Seven out of ten new jobs in America are created by small businesses. And there is a source of upward mobility in America that comes with ownership. When a woman owns her own business she's upwardly mobile. When a Latino or an African American starts his or her own business they become upwardly mobile. Ownership is a powerful part of the American Dream. (Applause.)And so the fundamental question in this campaign: Who's got the best strategy to make sure the entrepreneurial spirit is strong; who's got the idea -- who understands and who can best make sure that more small businesses grow in America? First, in order to make sure the entrepreneurial spirit is strong, America must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.) If you want businesses to start, this must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.)And, secondly, to make sure this is a hopeful world, we've got to make sure the work force is the best trained in the world. A lot of good jobs and a lot of good hopes start with good education. First, let me talk about how to make sure this is the best place in the world to do business. One, we've got to keep your taxes low. (Applause.) We passed good tax relief. We raised the child credit. That helps if you're a mom or a dad. We reduced the marriage penalty. I believe strongly the tax code ought to encourage marriage, not penalize marriage. (Applause.) We created a 10 percent bracket. That helps the working families. But we also said, if you pay taxes, you ought to get relief. If you're going to have tax relief, everybody who pays taxes ought to get relief. That's only fair. (Applause.)But guess what happens? What most Americans don't know, and evidently what my opponent doesn't know, is that most small businesses are either a subchapter-S corporation, like the two small businesses I just mentioned, or sole proprietorships, which means you pay tax at the individual income tax rate. Ninety percent of businesses in America pay individual income taxes, which says, when you cut the taxes on everybody who pays taxes, you're helping the small businesses. See, there is a connection between good tax relief and growth in the small business sector.And so to encourage small business investment, not only do we say, you can have more money in your coffer so you can expand your business or pay more money or better afford health care, but we encourage investment by increasing the small business expensing deduction from $25,000 to $100,000. See, I understand if you create the demand for goods and services and provide incentives for investment, the economy grows. That's what you -- that's what you've got to understand. It's a difference of opinion. It's a difference of philosophy. (Applause.) My opponent believes the economy grows by growing the size of the federal government. I believe the economy grows by growing the size of the coffers of small businesses. (Applause.)Here's what Paul Schoeneck of New Berlin, Wisconsin said. See, his business, like the other two, were subchapter-S corporations. He said about tax relief, ""We have doubled our work force. We've increased pay. We have consistently paid out bonuses. We've significantly increased our gross and net income. We've increased our production lines by nine, remodeled our offices, and significantly improved our infrastructure."" That's what he said. Those aren't my words. That is what a small business owner from Wisconsin has said about the tax relief. He said, ""Without tax relief, this would not have been possible."" (Applause.)I want you, when you hear these people talking about tax relief, about how it only benefited certain people, this tax relief has helped our small businesses grow and prosper, and this economy is on the move because the entrepreneurial spirit is strong. (Applause.)And taxes are an issue in this campaign. I'm running against a fellow who's promised $2.2 trillion of new federal spending. That's with a ""T"" That is -- that's a lot even for a Senator from Massachusetts. (Laughter.) So they said, how are you going to pay for it? He said, oh, we'll just tax the rich. That means, raise the top two brackets. By raising the top two brackets, he's taxing the small business sector of America. That's bad economic policy. Just as the economy is beginning to grow, just as the small businesses are feeling confident -- I talked to the two small business owners here. I said, you're going to hire somebody? They said, we're thinking about hiring new people. But running up the taxes on them would make it less likely they'd hire somebody. It's bad economic policy to tax the small business owners of America, which is precisely what my opponent's plan would do. (Applause.)See, when you say you're going to run up the top two brackets, you raise about $600 billion, maybe $800 billion, depending on whose accountant you use. (Laughter.) But the point is, in either case, you're far short of the $2.2 trillion that he has promised. There is a gap. There is a gap between what he's promised and what he can deliver. And guess who usually gets to fill the gap?AUDIENCE: We do!THE PRESIDENT: Yes, you do. But we're not going to let him tax you. We're going to win on November the 2nd. (Applause.)The bottom line about our economic visions is this: To pay for all his new spending he's proposed, my opponent will have to raise taxes not just on small business owners, but on everyone who's ever worked for a small business, shopped at a small business, or walked by a small business. (Laughter.) We're not going to let him tax you. We're going to win. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: To make sure -- to make sure that this economy is strong and the small businesses can flourish, we've got to do something about the frivolous and junk lawsuits. These kind of lawsuits cost our economy about $230 billion a year. This amounts to about $3,000 a year for the average family. They're expensive, and they're really expensive on small businesses. If part of the vision is to make sure the small business sector of our economy flourishes, we've got to do something about the liability. The average cost of tort liability for a small business is about $150,000. That's money that could be better used for employees, worker training, health care, expanding the business, creating new jobs. (Applause.)My opponent and I have a different approach. He's sided with the personal injury trial lawyers time and time again. They're powerful in Washington, make no mistake about it. It's hard to get good legal reform out of the United States Senate because they're influential. As a matter of fact, he's raised more money from lawyers than any other member of the United States Senate. That's about $22 million so far, since 1989, and still counting. And there's a reason why. He's voted five times against protecting small businesses on punitive damages. He's made it clear where he stands. He's made it abundantly clear. He's put a personal injury trial lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, I'm going to stand -- I'm going to stand with our small business owners and continue to be for legal reforms in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)We need less regulations on our small businesses. We need reasonable regulations. I can't guarantee that anybody in Washington has ever read the forms small businesses have to fill out. I wish I could say they have; I doubt it. But one way to make sure we reduce the burden on our -- not only our small businesses, but our -- the working people here in America is to reform the tax code. It's a complicated mess. It is too complex. (Applause.) I'm going to bring people together. Listen, I recognize the -- first of all, the code is a million pages long. American workers and small business owners and families spend six billion hours a year filling out the forms. We can do a better job. We can make this tax code pro-growth, pro-family, and fair. And I will bring Republics [sic] and Democrats together to do so. (Applause.)A couple of other quick points on how to make sure the environment is good for business growth so that you've got more money, so that you can manage your budget better, so that people can find a job. We need -- Congress needs to pass my energy plan. It's a plan that makes sense. It's common sense. It encourages conservation; it encourages the use of renewables, like ethanol and biodiesel. It uses technologies to help us burn coal more cleanly. It encourages exploration for natural gas in environmentally friendly ways. To make sure that this environment for growth is strong, we need to be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)Let me talk right quick about education, because I believe a good economy requires this work force of ours to be educated. I think the two go hand in hand. I don't think you can have a hopeful environment for growth if our people aren't educated. It all starts with the younger kids. That's why I went to Washington to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations. You know, this business about just shuffling the children through, grade after grade, year after year, without learning the basics was not good enough for America, as far as I'm concerned. I believe every child can learn, and I believe every school must teach. (Applause.) And so we increased funding, particularly for Title I students. But we said, in return for extra funding, show us whether or not a child can read and write and add and subtract.See, I understand you can't solve a problem until you diagnose a problem. You can't fix a problem until you fully understand the nature of the problem. By measuring -- by measuring, we now know where the problems exist in America, and we're providing the extra money to solve them. And guess what's happening? Kids are learning to read and write and add and subtract. Because we're measuring, we now know the benchmarks. We're seeing progress. We're closing the achievement gap amongst minority students in America. And we're not going to go back to the old days of mediocrity and low standards. (Applause.)I think one of the country's greatest assets is the community college system. Community colleges are able to adjust their curriculum to meet the needs of the job providers. I've met small businesses who have told me about helping set up a curriculum in our community colleges so our workers can gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. You just heard about Joan's company, where in her basement, she started a company over the Internet. In other words, we need new skill sets as this economy of ours changes. And a great place for America's workers to gain new skill sets is in the community college system all across our country. (Applause.)Most of the uninsured in America work for small businesses. Small businesses are having trouble affording health care. That's why I believe small businesses ought to be allowed to pool risk to join together so they can buy insurance at the same discount that big companies are able to do. (Applause.)We'll expand health savings accounts to help our families and small businesses to be able to better afford health insurance, and at the same time, provide a health account that you can own, and you can manage, you can take with you from job to job. And we'll make sure we do something about these frivolous lawsuits that are running up the cost of health care. This is a national issue. I have met too many OB/GYNs who are being driven out of practice because the lawsuits are running up their cost of doing business, their premiums. And I've met too many patients of OB/GYNs who are having to drive for miles, wondering whether or not they and their child will get the health care they need.Medical liability is a crisis in America. And it's a crisis because we can't get anything done in the United States Senate, because the trial bar is too strong. My opponent has voted against medical liability reform not once, not twice, but 10 times. In a new term, I'm going to bring people together and say, the people have spoke. We need medical liability reform now to make sure health care is affordable and available. (Applause.)We have a big difference when it comes to health care in this campaign. And it is a big difference. I remember that debate when my opponent stood up there with a straight face, and he said, ""The government has nothing to do with it,"" -- ""it"" being his health care plan. I could barely contain myself. (Laughter.) The government has got a lot to do with it -- a lot to do with it. Eight out of 10 people would end up on the government health care. Think about this, when you run up the Medicaid, make Medicaid more eligible for people, it's going to provide an incentive for small businesses to not provide insurance for their employees because the government will. That doesn't make any sense to be moving people from private insurance to the government. When the government writes the check, the government starts setting the rules, and you don't want the federal government making the rules when it comes to your health care. (Applause.)I've come here to Wisconsin to tell the people I understand how this economy works, and my policies are standing square with the workers, the families, and the small business owners of America. I also want to tell you in changing times, some things do not change, the values we try to live by: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In changing times, we will support, and must support, the institutions that give our lives direction and purpose: our families, our schools, and our religious congregations. (Applause.)We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every being counts. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)My opponent takes a different approach. His words on these issues are a little murky, but his record is really clear. (Laughter.) He says he supports the institution of marriage, but voted against the Defense of Marriage Act, which overwhelmingly passed with Democrat and Republican votes. My predecessor signed that bill into law, which defined marriage as a union between a man and a woman, and my opponent voted against it. He says -- you know, he says he's got a personal view on the issue of life, but he voted against the ban on the brutal practice of partial birth abortion.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He's called the Reagan years a time of moral darkness.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: There is a mainstream in American politics, and my opponent sits on the far left bank. (Applause.) My fellow Americans, he can run from his views, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)All the progress we hope for in America and all the prosperity and opportunity we want for every family and for our children ultimately depends on the security of our nation. We're in the middle of a global war on terror. We face a determined enemy. In the war on terror, there's no place for confusion, no place for weakness, no substitute for victory. (Applause.) I believe if America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear. We're defending the homeland; we're strengthening our intelligence services; we're transforming our military. There will be no draft. The all-volunteer army will remain an all-volunteer army. (Applause.) We're on the offensive. We will strike the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)We're promoting democracy and liberty, the great alternatives to despair and terror. I want you to tell your children about what took place in Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago that young girls lived under the reign of the Taliban, a brutal, barbaric people. They would not let young girls go to school, and if their mothers didn't toe their ideological line, they were taken in the public square sometimes and whipped. These people were dark and dim. There was darkness in Afghanistan. Because we defended ourselves, because we believe in freedom, the Afghanistan people went by the millions to the polls to vote for their President. The first voter -- the first voter was a 19-year-old woman. (Applause.)Iraq will have a presidential elections. Think how far that country has come from the days of torture chambers and mass graves. Freedom is on the march. Freedom is on the move, and our country is better for it. (Applause.)A President must lead with consistency and strength in these troubling times. In war, sometimes you change your tactics, but you never change your principles. (Applause.) And Americans have seen how I do my job. (Applause.) Thank you. Even when you might not agree with me, you know where I stand, what I believe, and what I intend to do. On good days and on bad days, whether the polls are up or the polls are down, I am determined to win this war on terror, and I will always support the men and women of the United States military. (Applause.)My opponent has taken a different approach. It's fair to say that consistency has not been his strong point. (Laughter.) Senator Kerry says we're better off with Saddam Hussein out of power, except when he declared that removing Saddam made us less safe. He stated in our second debate that he always believed that Saddam was a threat -- except, a few questions later, when he said Saddam Hussein was not a threat. (Laughter.) He says he was right when he voted to authorize the use of force against Saddam Hussein, but that I was wrong to use force against Saddam Hussein. (Laughter.)And now he's throwing out a wild claim that he knows where bin Laden was in the fall of 2001, and that our military passed up a chance to get him at Tora Bora. It is unjustified criticism of the military commanders in the field. It is the worst kind of Monday-morning quarterbacking. (Applause.) Our Commander in Afghanistan at the time was General Tommy Franks, and he wrote this about Tora Bora. He said, ""The Senator's understanding of events does not square with reality."" (Laughter.) That's what the man who was there said. He says the American Special Forces were actively involved in the search for the terrorists in Tora Bora, and that intelligence reports at the time placed bin Laden in one of several countries. They didn't know whether he was here, there, or otherwise. In other words, they didn't have hard intelligence. Maybe my opponent has seen something we all haven't seen.As a matter of fact, Senator Kerry, before he got into politicaldifficultly and revised his views, he said this about Tora Bora on national TV, in the fall of 2001, he said, ""I think we have been doing this pretty effectively and we should continue to do it that way."" At the time the Senator said about Tora Bora, ""I think we have been smart. I think the administration leadership has done it well, and we are on the right track."" All I can say about that is, I am George W. Bush and I approve of that message. (Applause.)My opponent's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the Cold War, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right. (Applause.)When former President Bush led a coalition against Saddam Hussein in 1991, Senator Kerry voted against the use of force to liberate Kuwait, even though the United Nations had passed a resolution and there was a strong coalition and agreement with U.S. policy. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong, former President Bush was right. (Applause.)In 1994, just one year after the first bombing of the World Trade Center, my opponent proposed massive cuts in America's intelligence budget, so massive that even his Massachusetts colleague, Ted Kennedy, opposed them. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong -- we've got to be fair -- Senator Kennedy was right. (Laughter and applause.)The President must be consistent and strong in these difficult times. Just last year, when American troops were in combat in Afghanistan and Iraq, I proposed $87 billion of increased funding to support our troops in harm's way. It was important funding. Bipartisan support for that funding was very strong. As you round up the vote, I want you to remind your friends and neighbors of this startling statistic: Only four members of the United States Senate -- four out of 100 -- voted to authorize the use of force, and then voted against funding for our troops in harm's way. And two of those four were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: You might remember, when they asked him about the vote, he said this. He said, ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion, right before I voted against it."" History has shown that Senator Kerry was right, then wrong, then briefly right, then wrong again. (Laughter and applause.) They finally kept pressing him -- they finally kept pressing him. He said the whole thing about the $87 billion was a complicated matter. My friends, there is nothing complicated about supporting our men and women in combat. (Applause.)And speaking about those men and women, we have got a fantastic military and I'm proud to be their Commander-in-Chief. (Applause.) And I want to thank the military families who are here today for your sacrifice. (Applause.) And I want to thank the veterans who are here today for having set such a great example. (Applause.)During the last 20 years, in key moments of challenge and decision for America, Senator Kerry has chosen a position of weakness and inaction. With that record he stands in opposition not just to me, but to the great tradition of the Democratic Party. The party of Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman and John Kennedy is rightly remembered for confidence and resolve in times of war and hours of crisis. Senator Kerry has turned his back on ""pay any price,"" and ""bear any burden."" He's replaced those commitments with ""wait and see,"" and ""cut and run."" Many Democrats in this country do not recognize their party anymore. And today I want to speak to every one of them. If you believe America should lead with strength and purpose and confidence and resolve, I'd be honored to have your support and I'm asking for your vote. (Applause.)Our differences on keeping the security of the country and protecting our families are vast. My opponent says that September the 11th did not change him much at all.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And his policies make that clear. He says the war on terror is primarily a law enforcement and intelligence-gathering operation. Well, my outlook was changed on September the 11th. I'll never forget going to the Ground Zero on September the 14th, 2001. There were workers in hard hats there yelling at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes."" I'll never forget the sights and sounds. I'll never forget the person looking me straight in the eye and saying, ""Do not let me down."" Ever since that day I wake up every morning trying to figure out how best to protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)When I traveled your state -- when I traveled your state four years ago, I made a pledge that if I was elected, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, with your hard work, I will do so for four more years. Thanks for coming. God bless. (Applause.) Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all. (Applause.) Thank you all  for coming.AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: It's getting close to voting time, and I am here to ask for your help. (Applause.) Get your friends and neighbors to go to the polls. Remind people we have a duty to vote. And when you get them headed to the polls -- and by the way, don't overlook discerning Democrats -- (laughter) -- people like Senator Zell Miller. (Applause.) When you get them headed to the polls, remind them, if they want a safer America, a stronger America, and a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney back in office. (Applause.)I want to thank you all for coming. It's a great way to start a Saturday morning -- at the ballpark with a lot of great Americans. (Applause.) I'm so happy that Laura is traveling with me today. (Applause.) Today I'm going to talk about why I think you need to put me back in office for four more years, but perhaps the most important reason of all is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)My running mate, Dick Cheney, is out working hard. Listen, I readily concede he does not have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) You'll be happy to hear I didn't pick him because of his hairdo. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his judgment and his experience and he's getting the job done for the American people. (Applause.)I'm proud of my brother, Jeb. (Applause.) When the hurricanes hit this part of your state, I came by to try to lend my support, to remind people that the federal government will do everything we can do to help the people of this part of the world get their feet back on the ground. But your Governor showed great compassion and great leadership. (Applause.)I want to thank Connie Mack for joining us today. He represented this state and this district with such class and dignity. I'm proud that his son, Connie Mack, IV, is running for the United States Congress. Nothing -- (applause) -- there's nothing wrong with a son following in a father's footsteps. (Applause.) When you're in there voting for Connie, make sure you put Mel Martinez in the United States Senate. (Applause.)I want to thank my friend, Congressman Mark Foley, for joining us today. I appreciate the Mayor of Fort Myers, being here. Mayor Humphrey, thanks for coming. I want to thank the Attorney General for joining us. I want to thank the House Speaker. Listen, I want to thank all the people who are serving for coming here today. (Applause.) I thank my friend, Daron Norwood, for singing to help entertain you before the -- before we made it here. (Applause.)Most of all, I want to thank you. I want to thank the people putting up the signs, making the phone calls, doing all the hard work at the grassroots level. With your help, we'll carry Florida again and win a great victory. (Applause.)We've just got 10 days to go in this campaign. And voters have a clear choice between two very different candidates with different approaches and different records. You know where I stand. (Applause.) And sometimes -- and sometimes, you even know where my opponent stands. (Laughter.) We both have -- we both have records. I am proudly running on mine. (Applause.) The Senator is running from his. (Laughter.) And there's a reason why. There's a reason why. There is a mainstream in American politics, and my opponent sits on the far left bank. (Laughter.) I'm a compassionate conservative and proudly so. (Applause.)This election comes down to five clear choices for American families, five choices on issues of great consequence: your family's security, your family's budget, your quality of life, your retirement, and the bedrock values that are so critical to our families and to our future. (Applause.)The first clear choice is very important because it concerns the security of our country and the security of your family. All our progresses on every issue depends on the safety of our citizens. This will be the first presidential election since September the 11th, 2001. Americans will go to the poll in a time of war and ongoing threats unlike any we have faced before. The terrorists who killed thousands of innocent people are still dangerous and determined to strike us again. The outcome of this election will set the direction of the war against terror. The most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, with have fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear. We've strengthened protections for our homeland. We're reforming our intelligence capabilities. To meet the changing threat in today's world, we are transforming our all-volunteer army -- I will keep it an all-volunteer army. (Applause.) We're on the offensive; we will stay on the offensive. And we're succeeding. More than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice, and the rest of them know we're on their trail. (Applause.)My opponent has a very different approach. He says that September the 11th -- he says that September the 11th -- quote -- ""didn't change me much at all."" End quote.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And that's pretty clear. He considers the war on terror primarily a law enforcement and intelligence-gathering operation.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: His top foreign policy advisor questioned it is even a war at all, saying, it's like a metaphor, like the war on poverty.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Anyone who thinks we are fighting a metaphor does not understand the enemy we face. (Applause.) You cannot win a war if you are not convinced we're even in one. Senator Kerry also misunderstands our battle against the insurgents and terrorists in Iraq. After voting to authorize force against Saddam Hussein, after calling it, the right decision, when I sent troops into Iraq, the Senator now calls it, the wrong war.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: The Senator used to recognize that Saddam Hussein was a gathering threat who hated America. After all, he said so. He used to recognize that Saddam was a state sponsor of terror with a history of pursuing and even using weapons of mass destruction. After all, he said so. He used to understand that Saddam was a major source of instability in the Middle East. After all, he said so. And when he voted to authorize force, the Senator must have recognized the nightmare scenario that terrorists might somehow access weapons of mass destruction. Senator Kerry seems to have forgotten all of that, as his position has evolved during the course of the campaign. You might call it election amnesia. (Applause.) I know then and I know now that America and the world are safer with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. (Applause.)Senator Kerry now calls Iraq a diversion.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: But the case of just one terrorist shows how wrong his thinking is. It's a man named Zarqawi. He's responsible for planting car bombs and beheading Americans in Iraq. I want you to remember, he ran a terrorist camp, a terrorist training camp, in Afghanistan until our forces arrived to destroy that camp. (Applause.) He then fled to Iraq. He recently publicly announced his allegiance to Osama bin Laden. If Zarqawi and his associates were not busy fighting American forces in Iraq, what does Senator Kerry think, that he'd be a small businessman? (Laughter.) That he'd be living a peaceful life, making positive contributions to society somewhere? I don't think so. Our troops will defeat them there so we do not have to face them in our own cities. (Applause.)The choice in this election cannot be clearer. You cannot lead our nation to the decisive victory on which the security of every American family depends if you do not see the true dangers of the post-September 11th world. My opponent has a September the 10th point of view. At convention -- at his convention, he declared that his strategy will be to respond to attacks after America is hit.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That would be too late. In our debates, he said, with a straight face, we can defend America only if we pass a global test.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I'm not making that up. I heard him. He was standing right there when he said it. (Applause.) I will work with our friends and allies, but I will never turn over our national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)I want to thank the veterans who are here. (Applause.) I want to thank the military families who are here. (Applause.) I want to thank those who wear the uniform who are here. (Applause.) You will have the full support of our government. That's why I went to Congress and proposed $87 billion of funding. I want -- as you gather up the vote, I want you to remind your fellow citizens of this startling statistic. Four members of the United States Senate voted to authorize the use of force and then voted against funding for our troops in combat -- only four members, two of whom were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: My opponent is a person that said he actually did vote for the $87 billion right before he voted against it. He then said the whole thing was a complicated matter. There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in harm's way. (Applause.)I believe -- I believe in the transformational power of liberty. I want you to recognize what's happened in Afghanistan. That country has gone from darkness to light. (Applause.) Young girls couldn't go to school some three-and-a-half years ago. Their mothers were whipped in the public square if they didn't toe the line of these barbaric Taliban. Today, because we defended ourselves, freedom is on the march. Millions voted in a presidential election. The first voter was a 19-year-old woman, and the world is better off for it. (Applause.)Despite ongoing violence, Iraq has an interim government. It's building up its own security forces. We're headed toward elections in January. You see, we're safer, America is safer with Afghanistan and Iraq on the road to democracy. We can be proud that 50 million citizens of those countries now live as free men and women. (Applause.) We must understand that free societies help us keep the peace. I believe strongly in freedom. Freedom is not America's gift to the world; freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)The second clear choice in this election concerns your family budget. When I ran for President four years ago, I pledged to lower taxes for America's families. I kept my word. (Applause.) We doubled the child credit to $1,000 per child. We reduced the marriage penalty. Our tax code ought to encourage marriage, not penalize marriage. (Applause.) We dropped the lowest bracket to 10 percent to help our families. We reduced income taxes for everybody who pays taxes. As a result of these good policies, real after-tax income, the money in your pocket, the money you get to use, is up about 10 percent since I took office. (Applause.)Our economy has been through a lot. See, that stock market was in serious decline six months prior to my inauguration. That stock market decline foretold a recession. And then we had some corporate scandals. By the way, we made it clear, we're not going to tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of this country. (Applause.) And then we got attacked, and those attacks hurt our economy. We lost about a million jobs in the three months after September the 11th. But our economic policies have led us back to growth, and that's good for American families. Our economy is growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. We've added 1.9 million new jobs since August of 2003. The national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent, lower than the average of the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.) The unemployment rate in your great state is 4.5 percent. (Applause.) We're moving forward.My opponent has different plans for your budget. He intends to take a big chunk out of it.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: When I asked Congress to help grow this economy and help our American families, he voted against the higher child credit, he voted against marriage penalty relief, he voted against lower taxes. If he had had his way, the average middle-class family would be paying $2,000 more a year to the federal government.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: It's kind of part of a pattern. He voted 10 times to raise taxes on gasoline as a United States Senator. And all told, during his 20 years in the Senate, he voted 98 times to raise taxes.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Think about it. It's about five times a year he's voted to raise taxes. When a Senator does something that often, he must really enjoy it. (Laughter.) And that's a warning. That's a predictable pattern. During the campaign, he's made a lot of big, expensive promises. He's promised about $2.2 trillion of new spending. That's with a ""T."" (Laughter.) That's a lot even for a Senator from Massachusetts. (Laughter.)So they said, how are you going to pay for it. And he said, oh, I'm just going to tax the rich. We have heard that before. First of all, when you raise the top two brackets, you know who you're taxing -- you're taxing job creators. Most small businesses pay tax at the individual income tax rate. Seventy percent of new jobs in America are created by small businesses. Raising taxes on small businesses is lousy economic policy. (Applause.)When you talk about running up the top two brackets or taxing the rich, you raise about $600 billion or $800 billion, depending on who's counting, but remember, that's far short of the $2.2 trillion he promised. So there's a gap, a gap between what he's promised and how he's going to raise the money. And guess who usually gets to fill the gap.AUDIENCE: We do!THE PRESIDENT: That's exactly right. And finally, the rich hire lawyers and accountants during tax time for a reason. That's to slip the tab and stick you with the bill. We're not going to let him raise your taxes. We're going to carry Florida and win a great victory in November. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: The third clear choice -- the third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our nation's families. I believe a good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. (Applause.) When I ran for President four years ago, I promised to end the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. (Applause.) We passed the No Child Left Behind Act, meaningful education reforms to bring high standards to our classrooms and to make schools more accountable to our parents. We're making progress. Math and reading scores are rising. We're closing an achievement gap by helping all students. We will build on these reforms. We will extend them to our high school so that no child is left behind in America. (Applause.)We will continue to improve life for our families by making health care more available and more affordable. We'll expand health savings accounts so more small businesses can cover their workers and more families will be able to get health care accounts they can manage and call their own. We will create association health plans so small businesses can join together to buy insurance at the same discounts big companies get. (Applause.)We will help families in need by expanding community health centers, and making sure every eligible child is enrolled in our government's low-income health programs. We'll help patients and doctors everywhere by doing something about the frivolous lawsuits that run up the cost of your practice and run good doctors out of business. (Applause.) We want our doctors focusing on fighting illnesses, not on fighting frivolous lawsuits. (Applause.) These lawsuits are a national problem that require a national solution. I am for medical liability reform. (Applause.)Senator Kerry has a different point of view on our schools and health care system. Listen, he voted for the No Child Left Behind Act, but now wants to weaken the accountability standards. He's proposed including measures like teacher attendance to judge whether students can read or write or add and subtract.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He voted against health savings accounts. He opposes association health plans. He has voted 10 times against medical liability reform.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: You heard him in the debates the other day mouth something about helping our docs and patients. Remember, he put a personal injury trial lawyer on the ticket. (Applause.) He can run from his record, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)Now he's proposing a big government health care plan that would cause 8 million families to lose private coverage they get at work and have to go onto a government plan. Eighty percent of the people who get coverage under his idea would be enrolled in a government program. In one of our debates, he tried to tell America that when it comes to his health care plan -- and I quote -- ""The government has nothing to do with it."" (Laughter.) I could barely contain myself. (Laughter.) He can run from his record, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)My opponent's plan would move America down the road to federal control of health care, and that is the wrong road for American families. (Applause.) In all we do to improve health care in a new term, we will make sure the decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by officials in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)The fourth clear choice in this election involves your retirement. Our nation has made a solemn commitment to our seniors on Medicare and Social Security. When I ran for President four years ago, I promised to keep that commitment. I promised to improve Medicare by adding prescription drug coverage for our seniors. I kept my word. (Applause.) You remember those endless debates -- leaders on both political parties have talked about strengthening Medicare for years. We got the job done. Seniors are now getting discounts on medicine through drug discount cards. Low-income seniors are getting $600 to help them this year and next year, and beginning in 2006, all seniors will be able to get prescription drugs coverage under Medicare. (Applause.)My opponent voted against the Medicare bill that included prescription drug coverage, even though it was supported by AARP and other senior groups. Later he said -- quote -- ""If I'm the President, we're going to repeal that phony bill."" Then a little later he said, no, I don't want to repeal it. Sounds familiar. As your President for the next four years, I will defend the reforms we have worked so hard to pass and keep the promise to America's seniors. (Applause.)And we will keep the promise of Social Security for our seniors. And as we do so, we will strengthen Social Security for generations to come. Every election -- every election, desperate politicians try to scare our seniors about Social Security. It's just predictable. You remember in the 2000 campaign, they ran the ads telling our seniors, if George W. gets elected, you won't get your Social Security check. Well, when you're out gathering up the vote, remind our seniors that George W. did get elected and our seniors did get their checks. (Applause.)And our seniors will continue to get their checks. And baby boomers are in pretty good shape when it comes to the Social Security trust. But we all must be concerned about our children and our grandchildren. Some day, our youngest workers will retire, and we've got to make sure the Social Security system will be there when they need it. I believe younger workers ought to be able to take some of their own money and put it into a personal savings account, a personal savings account that will earn a better rate of return, a personal savings account they can call their own, an account the government cannot take away. (Applause.)Once again, my opponent takes a different point of view. He talks about protecting Social Security, but he's the only candidate in this race who voted eight times for higher taxes on Social Security benefits.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And when it comes to the next generation, he has offered nothing. The job of the President is to confront problems, not to pass them on to future generations and future Presidents. In a new term, I will bring Republicans and Democrats together to strengthen Social Security for an upcoming generation of America. (Applause.)The fifth choice in this election is on the values that are so crucial to keeping our family strong. And here, my opponent and I are miles apart. I believe marriage is a sacred commitment -- (applause) -- a pillar of our civilization, and I will defend it. (Applause.) This is not a partisan issue. When Congress passed the Defense of Marriage Act, defining marriage as a union of a man and a woman, the vast majority of Democrats supported it. My predecessor, President Clinton, signed it into law. But Senator Kerry was part of an out-of-the-mainstream minority that voted against the Defense of Marriage Act.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I believe that reasonable people can find common ground on difficult issues. Republicans and Democrats and many citizens on both sides of the life issue came together and agreed that we should ban the brutal practice of partial birth abortions. (Applause.) Senator Kerry was part of an out-of-the-mainstream minority that voted against the ban.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He voted against parental notification laws.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Against the Unborn Victims of Violence Act.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I will continue to reach out to Americans of every belief and move this good-hearted nation toward a culture of life. (Applause.)My opponent has said that the heart and soul of America can be found in Hollywood.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Most American families do not look to Hollywood as a source of values. The heart and soul of America is found right here in Fort Myers, Florida. (Applause.)All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country, the health and education of our families, the retirement of our seniors and the direction of our culture are all at stake. The decision is in the best hands, because the decision belongs to the American people. (Applause.)I see a bright future for America. I see a better day for all of us. One of my favorite quotes war written by a fellow Texan, Tom Lea. He said, ""Sarah and I live on the east side of the mountain. It's the sunrise side, not the sunset side. It is the side to see the day that is coming, not to see the day that is gone."" (Applause.) If you listen carefully to this campaign, my opponent has spent much of this campaign talking about the day that is gone. I see the day that is coming.We've been through a lot together in the last four years. Because we've done the hard work of climbing that mountain, we can see the valley below. We'll protect our families. We'll build their prosperity. We will defend the deepest values. We'll spread freedom in this world, and as we do so, we'll keep America safe and spread the peace. (Applause.)Four years ago, when I traveled your great state asking for the vote, I made this pledge. I said if I was elected, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, I will do so for four more years. God bless. Thanks for coming. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all for coming. (Applause.) Thank you all for coming. It seems like yesterday I was here in Wilkes-Barre. (Applause.) Come to think of it, I was. (Laughter.) I figure if I keep coming back I'll meet everybody in town. (Applause.) I'm coming back because I want you to know how important your vote is. That's why I'm here. We're close to voting time. (Applause.) I've come back to tell you how important your help is in this election. Find your friends and neighbors. Convince them to go to the polls on November the 2nd. Do not overlook discerning Democrats, people like Zell Miller. (Applause.) And remind your friends and neighbors, if they want safer America, a stronger, and a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney  back in office. (Applause.)I regret that Laura is not traveling with us today.AUDIENCE: Awww --THE PRESIDENT: Yes, that is generally the reaction. (Laughter.) Kind of like, why didn't you stay home and let her come. (Laughter.) You know, we were in the same grade at San Jacinto Junior High in Midland, Texas. That would be the 7th grade. And then I became reacquainted with her when she was a public school librarian. (Laughter.) And when I asked her to marry me, she said, fine, but make me a promise. I said, what is it? Promise me I'll never have to give a speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you got a deal. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that promise. She's giving a lot of speeches. And when she does, the American people see a warm, compassionate, great First Lady. (Applause.)I love traveling with my daughters on the campaign trail. There's nothing better than being with somebody who -- well, tells you to keep your tie straight. (Laughter.) Don't spill your food before you get out there and talk to the people. (Laughter.) You know, I used to tell Barbara and Jenna that one of these days, we'll go on a camping trip together, the great family camping experience. I'm sure they envisioned the Colorado River or somewhere. Well darling, this is it. This is the great -- (laughter.) We're traveling this country asking for the vote, and I'm glad Barbara is by my side. (Applause.)I spoke with our great Vice President this morning. His spirits are high. He's working hard. I admit that Vice President Cheney does not have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) I didn't pick him because of his hairdo. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his experience, his sound judgement, and his ability to get the job done for the American people. (Applause.)I'm pleased to be sharing the platform with Congressman Don Sherwood. He's doing a great job. (Applause.) And Congressman Jim Greenwood is traveling today. He comes up from the suburbs of Philadelphia. I'm proud to have his support and I'm proud to call him friend. Thanks for coming, Congressman. (Applause.)Specter is out there working on behalf of his own campaign and Santorum is out there working for mine. They're two fine United States Senators. (Applause.) I hope you put Arlen Specter back in office. (Applause.)I want to thank all the state and local officials. I want to thank Jean Craige Pepper for being here, the candidate for treasurer of the state. I appreciate people who are running for office. I want to thank my friend, Sammy Kershaw, country singer. (Applause.)Most of all, I want to thank the grassroots activists who are here, the people putting up all the signs, making the phone calls, writing the letters. (Applause.) I'm here to thank you for what you're going to do as we're coming down the stretch. There is no doubt in my mind, with your hard work and with your help, we will carry Pennsylvania and win a great victory in November. (Applause.)With just 11 days left in this campaign -- who's counting? (Laughter.) Voters are focusing on the issues that matter most for their families and for our country. You've heard the debates. You know where I stand. Sometimes you even know where my opponent stands. (Laughter and applause.) You've had a chance to see both of us in action, to measure our consistency, our resolve, our values and our ability to lead. This election comes down to five clear choices for the American families, five choices on issues of great consequence: your family security, your budget, your quality of life, your retirement, and the bedrock values that are so critical to our families and our future. (Applause.)The first clear choice is very important because it concerns the security of your family. All progress on every other issue depends on the safety of our citizens. This will be the first presidential election since September the 11th, 2001. Americans will go to the polls in a time of war and ongoing threat to our country. The enemies who killed thousands of innocent people are still dangerous and determined to strike us again. The outcome of this election will set the direction of the war against terror, and in this war there is no place for confusion and no substitute for victory. (Applause.)The most solemn duty -- the most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that -- since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear. We're defending the homeland; we're strengthening our intelligence capabilities; we are transforming our all-volunteer army to make sure it remains an all-volunteer army -- (applause.) We are staying on the offensive, and we are succeeding. More than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice, and the rest of them know we're after them. (Applause.) We are in a real war, and the only strategy must lead to victory.My opponent has a different approach. He says that September the 11th -- quote -- ""didn't change me much at all.""AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And that's pretty clear. He considers the war on terror primarily a law enforcement and intelligence gathering operation. His top foreign policy advisor has questioned whether it's even a war at all, saying that's just a metaphor, like the war on poverty. I've got news. Anyone who thinks we are fighting a metaphor does not understand the enemy we face and has no idea how to win the war and keep America secure. (Applause.)My opponent also misunderstands our battle against insurgents and terrorists. He's called it a diversion from the war on terror. My opponent used to recognize Saddam Hussein as a threat. That's until he started to slide in the polls. Saddam Hussein was a threat to the United States. He hated America. He had a long history of pursuing and even using weapons of mass destruction. He had ties to terrorists. He was firing missiles at American pilots enforcing the sanctions of the world. He paid families of suicide bombers. He was a threat. (Applause.)We didn't find the stockpiles that we thought were in Iraq, that I thought was there, that my opponent thought was there, that the United Nations thought was there, that the world thought was there. But I want you to remember -- tell your friends and neighbors what the Duelfer report did find. It said that Saddam Hussein had the intent and capability and the expertise to rebuild a weapons program; that he was gaming the system, he was using the oil-for-food program to try to influence officials of other nations to get rid of the sanctions. And why? Because he wanted the world to look the other way so he could restart his programs. That was a risk we could not afford to take. Knowing what I know today, I would have taken the same action. (Applause.) America and the world are safer with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. (Applause.)Remember, my opponent called our action a mistake. That's after he started slipping in the polls. (Laughter.) Iraq is still dangerous because terrorists there are trying to stop the advance of freedom and elections. A man named Zarqawi is responsible for planting car bombs and beheading Americans in Iraq. He ran a terrorist training camp in Afghanistan until our coalition forces destroyed that camp. He then fled to Iraq where he's fighting us today. To confirm where he's coming from, he recently announced his allegiance to al Qaeda. If Zarqawi and his associates were not busy fighting American forces in Iraq, does my opponent think the would be peaceful citizens of the world? (Laughter.) Does he think they'd be opening a small business somewhere? (Laughter and applause.)Fighting the likes of Zarqawi in Iraq is not a diversion from the war on terror; it is the way we will win the war on terror. (Applause.) When it comes to your security, the choice in this election could not be clearer. You cannot lead our nation to decisive victory on which the security of every American family depends if you do not see the true dangers of the post-September the 11th era. My opponent has a September 10th point of view. At his convention, he declared his strategy was to respond to attacks after America had been hit.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: As we learned on September the 11th, it's too late to respond. In our debates, he said we can defend America only if we pass a global test.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I'm not making that up. He was standing right there when he said it. (Applause.) No, we'll work with friends and allies, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)For the sake of our freedom, and for your security, we'll fight this war with every asset of our national power. We'll protect America by striking the terrorists abroad, so we do not have to face them here at home. And we will prevail. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We've got another powerful asset at our disposal, and that's liberty. And that's freedom. (Applause.) I want the youngsters here listening to think about what has happened in a brief period of time, some three-and-a-half years in Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago in that country that young girls were not allowed to go to school, and their mothers were taken into the public square and whipped, or sometimes taken to a sports stadium and executed because they refused to toe the line of the ideologues of hate, the Taliban which ran Afghanistan.In working to secure ourselves, in ridding that country of terrorist camps, of upholding a doctrine that said, if you harbor a terrorist, you're just as guilty as the terrorist, we liberated over 25 million people in Afghanistan. And just a couple of weeks ago, millions of Afghan citizens voted in a presidential election, and the first voter was a 19-year-old woman. (Applause.) Freedom is on the march. That society has gone from darkness to light because of liberty, and America is more secure because of it. Free societies are peaceful societies. Free societies will not harbor terrorists. Free societies will be hopeful places where people can realize their dreams.Iraq will have elections in January. Iraq is changing. Think how far that country has come from the days of mass graves and torture chambers and the brutal reign of one man. I believe liberty has the capacity to transform societies and make the world a more peaceful place.One of our friends in the world is Prime Minister Koizumi. I said, ""our"" -- I'm talking about Laura and me. He is -- he's a good man. He's a person with whom I work. It wasn't all that long ago that we were at war with the Japanese. See, 60 years ago, we were fighting the Japanese. My dad was in that war. I'm confident many other people were in that war, or families represented were -- had fathers and grandfathers in the war against the Japanese. (Applause.)After World War II, Harry Truman -- after we won that war, Harry Truman believed in the power of liberty to transform an enemy into an ally. There were a lot of skeptics then. There were a lot of doubters the Japanese, the enemy could never become a democracy. Why do we even want to help them, some would say. After all, they destroyed a lot of U.S. lives. But there was faith and belief in the power of liberty to transform societies. And today, because of that belief, I sit down with the Prime Minister of Japan talking about keeping the peace that we all want, talking about dealing with the world's problems. Some day, a duly-elected leader from Iraq will be sitting down with the President of the United States of America, talking about the peace in the Middle East, and our children and our grandchildren will be better off for it. (Applause.)Freedom is on the march in this world. I believe everybody in the Middle East desires to live in freedom. I believe women in the Middle East want to live in a free society. I believe mothers and fathers want to raise their children in a free and peaceful world. I believe all these things because freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)The second clear choice in this election concerns your family budget. When I ran for President four years ago, I pledged to lower taxes for American families, and I kept my word. (Applause.) To help our families, we doubled the child credit to $1,000 per child. We reduced the marriage penalty. Our tax code should encourage marriage, not discourage marriage. (Applause.) We dropped the lowest tax bracket to 10 percent so working families, working Americans can keep more of their paychecks. We reduced income taxes for everyone that pays taxes. That's the fair way of doing things. (Applause.)As a result of our policies, real after-tax income, money in your pocket that you can spend, is up about 10 percent since I took office. (Applause.) Because of tax relief, because we increased consumer spending and investment, our economy is overcoming the tough times we've been through.Remind your friends and neighbors that when I got in office, the stock market had been in serious decline for six months prior to our arrival. (Applause.) Then we were in a recession. And the attacks of September the 11th, 2001 cost us nearly a million jobs in the three months after the attacks. But because we acted, this economy of ours is strong and it's getting stronger. Our economy is growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. We've added 1.9 million new jobs in the last three months. The state of Pennsylvania has added 4,600 jobs in the month of September, 2004. (Applause.) The unemployment rate across America is at 5.4 percent, lower than the average rates of the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.) And the new unemployment rate figure in the state of Pennsylvania released today is 5.3 percent. (Applause.)My opponent has a very different plan for your budget. He intends to take a bigger chunk out of it.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He voted against the -- he voted against a higher child tax credit. He voted against marriage penalty relief. He voted against lowering the tax rates. If his vote had prevailed, an average middle-class family would be paying $2,000 more a year to the IRS.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That's a fact. It's also part of a pattern. See, the Senator voted ten times to raise taxes on gasoline. All told, during his 20 years in the United States Senate, my opponent has voted to raise taxes 98 times. That's about five times a year. When he does something that often, he must really enjoy it. (Laughter.) During his campaign, my opponent has made a lot of big, expensive promises. He promised about $2.2 trillion of new spending. That's with a ""T."" (Laughter.) That's a lot, even for a senator from Massachusetts. (Applause.)So they said, how are you going to pay for it? He said, oh, we'll just tax the rich. We've heard that before, haven't we? He's going to raise the top two brackets. There's three things -- a lot of things wrong with it, but let me give you three right off the bat. One is, by raising individual rates, you're taxing many, many small businesses. Seventy percent of the new jobs in America are created by small businesses. Most small businesses pay tax at the individual income tax level. And by running up the top two brackets, you're taxing the job creators, and that's bad economic policy. (Applause.) Secondly, there's a gap between what he's promised and what he can deliver. By raising the top two brackets, you raise about $600 billion to $800 billion, and he's promised $2.2 trillion, so there's a gap, a gap between the promises and what he can deliver. Guess who gets to usually fill those gaps? Secondly -- or thirdly, the rich hire lawyers and accountants for a reason when it comes to taxes. That's to slip the bill and stick you with it. But we're going to protect the family budgets. We're going to carry Pennsylvania and win a great victory on November the 2nd. (Applause.)When it comes to your budget, you have a clear choice. My opponent has earned -- and I mean earned -- his rank as the most liberal member of the United States Senate. He'll raise your taxes to fund bigger government. I'm going to keep your taxes low. This is the road to prosperity. It's a road to economic vitality. Now, when it comes to taxes, he may try to run in a camouflaged outfit, but he cannot hide. (Laughter and applause.)The third choice in this election involves the quality of life for our families. I believe a good education and quality health care are important for successful lives. When I ran for President four years ago, I promised to end the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools, and I kept my word. (Applause.) We passed good education reform. We're raising the standards. We're making sure our schools are accountable -- accountable to our parents. We're seeing progress. Math and reading scores are on the rise. We're closing the achievement gap all across this country. We will build on these reforms. We will extend them to our high schools so that not one single child in America is left behind. (Applause.)We will continue to improve life for our families by making health care more affordable and more accessible. We'll expand health savings accounts and creation association health plans so small businesses can cover their workers, so more families are able to get health insurance plans they manage and they call their own. We'll help families in need by expanding community health centers. We'll make sure every eligible child is enrolled in our government's low-income health insurance program. To make sure health care is available and affordable for the American citizens, we're going to do something about the junk lawsuits that run up the cost of medicine and run good doctors out of practice. (Applause.)Doctor Linda Barrasse is with us today, a cardiologist. (Applause.) She's got a group practice in Scranton. She's just like the docs I met yesterday in Chester County, Pennsylvania. Doctors are concerned about the quality of health care in Pennsylvania because of all these junk lawsuits. They're running good docs out of practice. There are too many OB/GYNs being run out of practice, and too many Pennsylvania women having to drive for miles to get the care they need and deserve. (Applause.)Linda talks about needing to close offices. They're having trouble recruiting new doctors. Medical liability is an issue in the Pennsylvania. It is an issue across this country. It is a national problem that requires a national solution. I am for medical liability reform. (Applause.)Senator Kerry has a different point of view on our schools and our health care system. Now, he voted for the No Child Left Behind Act, but now wants to weaken the accountability standards. He's proposed including measures like teacher attendance in the accountability measures to judge whether students can read and write and add and subtract. He voted against health savings accounts. He opposed association health care plans that would help our small businesses. He has voted ten times against medical liability reform on the floor of the United States Senate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: The other day, he said, well, he's for some kind of plan. (Laughter.) He put a trial lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)He's proposed a big government health care plan that would cause eight million families to lose the private coverage they get at work and have to go on a government plan. Eighty percent of the people who get coverage under his proposal would be enrolled on a government program. You might remember one of our debates. He tried to tell the Americans, when it comes to his health care plan -- and I quote -- ""the government has nothing to do with it."" I could barely contain myself when I heard that. (Applause.) My opponent's plan would move America down the road to federal control of health care, and that is the wrong road to take for American families. (Applause.)In all we do to reform health care, we will make sure the decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by officials in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)Fourth clear choice in this election involves your retirement. Our nation made a solid commitment to America's seniors on Social Security and on Medicare. When I ran for President four years ago, I promised to keep that commitment and improve Medicare by adding prescription drugs. I kept my word. (Applause.) Leaders in both political parties have talked about strengthening Medicare for years. We got the job done. Seniors are now getting discounts on medicine with drug discount cards. Low-income seniors are getting $600 to help them with their prescription drugs this year, another $600 next year, and beginning in 2006, all seniors will be able to get prescription drug coverage under Medicare. (Applause.)My opponent voted against the Medicare bill that included prescription drugs, even though it was supported by AARP and other seniors groups. During this campaign, he said -- quote -- ""If I'm President, we're going to repeal that phony bill."" End quote. Then, of course, later on, he said, no, I don't want to repeal it. Sounds familiar. (Laughter.) As your President for the next four years, I will defend the reforms we have worked so hard to pass, and we will keep the promise of Medicare for America's seniors. (Applause.)We will keep the promise of Social Security for our seniors and strengthen Social Security for generations to come. (Applause.) Every election, politicians try to scare seniors about Social Security. It's predictable. In the 2000 campaign, they ran ads saying that if George W. gets elected, our seniors will not get their checks. You might remember those ads. As you round up the vote, would you please remind our seniors, George W. got elected, and our seniors got their checks. (Applause.) And when I get elected this time, the seniors will still get their checks. (Applause.)But I know today's moms and dads and grandparents are concerned about their children and grandchildren when it comes to Social Security. Some day, our youngest workers, of course, will retire, and we need to make sure Social Security will be there when they need it, as well. (Applause.) I believe younger workers ought to take some of their own money and put it in a personal savings account, a personal savings account that will earn a greater rate of return than a Social Security trust, a personal savings account, they can call their own, an account the government cannot take away. (Applause.)My opponent takes a different approach. He talks about protecting Social Security, but I want everybody to remember, he is the only candidate who has voted eight times for higher taxes on Social Security benefits.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: When it comes to the next generation, he has offered nothing to strengthen Social Security. American families have a clear choice in this election. My opponent wants to scare the seniors of today and do nothing to secure the system for seniors of tomorrow. I'll keep the promise of Social Security and Medicare, and strengthen these great systems for our children and our grandchildren. (Applause.)The fifth clear choice in this election is on the values that are so crucial to keeping America's families strong. Here, my opponent and I are miles apart. I believe marriage is a sacred commitment -- (applause) -- one of the most fundamental, most enduring, and most important institutions of our civilization. My opponent says he supports marriage, but his record shows he will not defend it. This isn't a partisan issue. The vast majority of Democrats, for example, supported the Defense of Marriage Act, which defined marriage as the union of a man and a woman, a bill which President Clinton signed into law. But Senator Kerry was a part of the far left bank, far left minority, that voted against that piece of legislation. I will always stand firm to protect the sanctity of marriage. (Applause.)I believe it is important to work with people to find common ground on difficult issues. Republicans and Democrats, many citizens on both sides of the life issue, agreed we should ban the brutal practice of partial birth abortion. (Applause.) But Senator Kerry was part of a far left minority that voted against the ban.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He also voted against parental notification laws and voted against the Unborn Victims of Violence Act. I will continue to --AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I will continue to reach out to Americans of every belief, and move this good-hearted nation toward a culture of life. (Applause.)My opponent -- my opponent has said that you can find the heart and soul of America in Hollywood. (Laughter.) Most of us don't look to Hollywood as the source of values. (Applause.) The heart and soul of America is found right here in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania. (Applause.)All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country, the health and education of our citizens, the retirement of our seniors, and the direction of our culture are all at stake. The decision is in the best hands because the decision belongs to the American people. (Applause.)I believe in the future of this country. We see a great day for the American people. One of my favorite quotes was written by a Texan, a friend of ours. He said, ""Sarah and I live on the east side of the mountain. It's the sunrise side, not the sunset side. It is the side that sees the day that is coming, not to see the day that is gone."" My opponent has spent a lot of this campaign talking about the day that is gone. I see the day that's coming. (Applause.)We've been through a lot together. We've been through a lot together in the last years. Because we've done the hard work of climbing that mountain, we see the valley below. We'll protect our families. We'll build on their prosperity. We'll defend our deepest values. We will spread freedom and peace. And as we do, America will be safer here at home.Four years ago, when I traveled your great state asking for the vote, I made a pledge that if you honored me with this office, I would uphold the honor and the dignity. With your help, I will do so for four more years. Thanks for coming. On to victory! Thank you all. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all. (Applause.) Thank you all for coming. (Applause.) So he said, a couple of hundred people might show up if you came. (Applause.) I came; thousands are here; and I'm grateful. (Applause.) You know what this tells me -- with your help, we will carry Pennsylvania  on November the 2nd. (Applause.)Listen, we have a duty in our country to vote. And I'm asking you to turn to your friends and neighbors, go to your coffee shops, your houses of worship, your community centers, and tell people that we have a duty. And as you get people going to the polls, don't overlook discerning Democrats, people like Senator Zell Miller from Georgia. (Applause.) Our message is for everybody: If you want a safer America, a stronger America, and a better America, put me and Dick Cheney back in office. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Thank you all for coming. I am so grateful so many came. It means a lot. My only regret is that Laura is not here to see this crowd. (Applause.) She was a public school librarian when I met her for the second time. See, we went to the 7th grade together, San Jacinto Junior High in Midland, Texas. When I met her the second time, and I finally asked her to marry me, she said, fine, just so long as I never have to give a speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you got a deal. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that promise. She's giving a lot of speeches, and when she does, the American people see a compassionate, strong, great First Lady. (Applause.) She is not with me today, but one of our twin daughters, Barbara, has come. (Applause.) Thank you for coming, baby. There's nothing better than campaigning for a President with a daughter you love. (Applause.)I'm proud of my Vice President, Dick Cheney. (Applause.) Now, look, I admit it, he does not have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) I did not pick him because of his hairdo. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his experience, his judgment. I picked him because he can get the job done. (Applause.)I am proud to have been introduced to this great crowd by Major Dick Winters. (Applause.) An American hero who commanded Easy Company in World War II. (Applause.) I want to thank Congressman Todd Platts for joining us today. I'm proud you're here, Congressman. I want to thank the folks who are here from the statehouse and local office. I'm here to say as clearly as I can that Scott Paterno needs to be the next congressman from the 17th congressional district. (Applause.) I appreciate Tom Corbett, who is going to be the next attorney general; and Jean Craige Pepper, who's running for treasurer. (Applause.)But most of all, I want to thank you all for coming. (Applause.) It's getting close to voting time. (Applause.) It's time to crank up the phones. It's time to put up the signs. (Applause.) It is time to carry Pennsylvania. (Applause.)In the last few years, the people have come to know me. They know my blunt way of speaking -- I get that from my mother. They know I mangle the English language sometimes -- I get that from my dad. (Laughter.) Americans also know I tell you exactly what I'm going to do, and I keep my word. (Applause.)When I came into office, the stock market had been in serious decline for six months, and the American economy was sliding into a recession. To help families and to get this economy growing again, I pledged to reduce taxes. I kept my word. (Applause.) The results are clear. The recession was one of the shallowest in American history. Over the last three years our economy has grown at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. The home ownership rate in America is at an all-time high. (Applause.) The past 13 months, we've added 1.9 million new jobs. (Applause.) The unemployment rate across our country is 5.4 percent -- lower than the average rates of the 1970s, 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.) Farm income is up. This economy is moving forward, and we're not going to go back to the days of tax and spend. (Applause.)To make sure jobs are here in America, to make sure people can find work, America must be the best place in the world to do business. That means less regulations on our job creators. That means we got to do something about these frivolous lawsuits that are plaguing small business owners. (Applause.) To keep jobs here in America, Congress needs to pass my energy plan. (Applause.) It's a plan that encourages conservation, and encourages renewables. It's a plan that encourages clean coal technology. It is a plan that recognizes, to keep jobs in America, we must be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.) To keep jobs here in America, we must open up markets for U.S. products. Listen, we can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere so long as the rules are fair. (Applause.)To make sure this economy continues to grow, we got to be wise about how we spend your money and keep the taxes low. (Applause.) Taxes are an issue in this campaign. Now, my opponent has his own history on the economy.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Yes. In 20 years as a senator from Massachusetts, he's built a record -- of a senator from Massachusetts. (Applause.) He's voted -- he has voted to raise taxes 98 times.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Yes. He voted to tax Social Security benefits.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Ninety-eight times in 20 years, that's about five times a year -- I would call that a predictable pattern. See, he can run from his record, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)Now, he's promising not to raise taxes for anyone who earns less than $200,000 a year. He said that with a straight face. (Laughter.) The problem is to keep that promise, he'd have to break all his other promises. He has promised $2.2 trillion in new federal spending -- that's trillion with a ""T."" And so, they said, how are you going to pay for it, and he said, fine, he's just going to raise taxes on the rich. Now, you've heard that before. When he tries to raise taxes on the rich, that raises between $600 billion and $800 billion. There's a gap between what he's promised and how he says he's going to pay for it. And guess who usually gets to fill the gap. AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: There's something else wrong with the tax the rich slogan. The rich hire lawyers and accountants for a reason -- to slip the bill and pass it to you. We are not going to let him tax you. We will carry Pennsylvania and win on November the 2nd. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: When I came into office our public schools had been waiting decades for hopeful reform. Too many of our children were being shuffled through school without learning the basics. I pledged to restore accountability in the school and to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations. I kept my word. (Applause.) We passed the No Child Left Behind Act and we're seeing results. Our children are making sustained gains in reading and math. We're closing achievement gaps all around this country, and we're not going to go back the days of low standards and accepted mediocrity. (Applause.)When I came into office we had a problem in Medicare. Medicine was changing, but Medicare was not. For example, we'd pay hundreds -- tens of thousands of dollars for heart surgery, but not one dime for the prescription drugs that could prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. That did not make any sense to our seniors. It wasn't right. I pledged to bring Republicans and Democrats together to strengthen and modernize Medicare; I kept my word. (Applause.) Seniors are getting discounts on medicine. And beginning in 2006, all seniors will be able to get prescription drug coverage under Medicare. (Applause.)We got more to do on health care. We got to make sure health care is available and affordable. We'll have a safety net for those with the greatest needs. That's why I believe in community health centers for the poor and the indigent. We'll do more to make sure poor children are fully subscribed in our programs for low-income families. Most of the uninsured in America work for small businesses. Small businesses are having trouble affording health care. To enable small businesses to afford health care we must allow them to pool together so they can buy insurance at the same discount big businesses get to do. (Applause.)We will expand health savings accounts so workers and small businesses are able to pay lower premiums and people can save, tax-free, in an health care account they manage and call their own. (Applause.) To make sure health care is available and affordable, we have to do something about the frivolous lawsuits that are running up the cost of medicine and running good doctors out of practice. (Applause.) You have a problem here in the state of Pennsylvania because of these junk lawsuits. You're losing too many good docs. Too many OB/GYNs are leaving the practice. Too many pregnant women are wondering whether or not they're going to get the health care they need in order to bring their child into this world. The system is broken. You cannot be pro-doctor, pro-patient and pro-personal injury lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to make a choice. My opponent put a personal injury lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He voted against medical liability reform ten times. I'm standing with the doctors. I'm standing with the patients. I'm standing with the people of Pennsylvania. I'm for medical liability reform now. (Applause.)I laid out a health care plan that's sensible and reasonable. Now, my opponent has got his health care plan of his own. And it's a plan for bigger government.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, the other day in the debate, he looked right in the camera again and he said this about his health care plan -- ""The government has nothing to do with it."" I remember him saying that. I was standing right there. (Laughter.) I could barely contain myself. (Applause.) The government has got a lot to do with his health care plan. Eight out of ten Americans would end up on a government health insurance program. Eight million Americans would lose their private health insurance at work, and most would go on a government plan. He says his plan helps small businesses. That's what -- that's not what small business groups think. They called it an overpriced albatross that would saddle small businesses with 225 new mandates.I have a different view. We've got to help small businesses afford insurance, not saddle them with a bunch of rules of regulations from Washington, D.C. (Applause.) In all we do to reform health care, I believe the health decisions need to be made by doctors and patients, not by officials in our Nation's Capital. (Applause.)I'll continue to set out policies for an optimistic and hopeful America. I believe this country should be an ownership society. There's a saying -- there's a saying, no one ever washes a rental car. (Laughter.) There's a lot of wisdom in that statement. When you own something, you care about it. When you own something in America, you care about the future of our country. (Applause.) That's why -- that's why we promote entrepreneurship in this administration. Every time a small business is started in America, somebody is achieving the American Dream. (Applause.)We're encouraging health savings accounts so people have the security of owning and managing their own health care account. We're encouraging home ownership. Listen, more and more people are able to open the door where they live and say, welcome to my home, welcome to my piece of property -- and America is better off for it. (Applause.)In a new term, we'll take the next step to build an ownership society by strengthening Social Security. Now, let me speak to the seniors who are here. You remember the 2000 campaign when they were running the TV ads that said if George W. gets elected, the seniors will not get their checks. That's old-style scare politics. I want you to remind your friends and neighbors, they got their checks. They'll continue to get their checks. And baby boomers like me are in pretty good shape when it comes to the Social Security trust fund. But we need to worry about our children and our grandchildren. See, we need to worry about whether or not the Social Security trust will be solvent when they need help in retirement. I think younger workers ought to be allowed to take some of their payroll taxes and set up a personal savings account that earns a better rate of return, an account they call their own, an account the government cannot take away. (Applause.)When it comes to Social Security, as you heard the other night in the debates, my opponent wants to maintain the status quo.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: The job of a President is to confront problems, not pass them on to future generations or future Presidents. (Applause.) He's against the Social Security reforms I laid out, and he's against about every other reform that gives more authority and control to the individual. On issue after issue, from Medicare without choices to schools with less accountability to raising taxes, he takes the side of more centralized control and more government. There is a word for that attitude. There is a word for that philosophy. It is called liberalism. (Applause.)Now, he dismisses that word as a label. He must have seen it differently when he said, I'm a liberal and proud of it. (Laughter.) The others have noticed, as well. There's a nonpartisan National Journal magazine that did a study and named him the most liberal member of the United States Senate. That takes a lot of hard work in that bunch. (Laughter.) Can you imagine being more liberal than Ted Kennedy?AUDIENCE: No!THE PRESIDENT: He can run -- he can even run in camo -- but he cannot hide. (Applause.)I have a different record. I have a different philosophy. I do not believe in big government and I do not believe government should be indifferent. I'm what I call a compassionate conservative. I believe in policies that empower people to improve their lives, not try to run their lives. We'll continue to help men and women all across this country find the skills and tools they need to prosper in a time of change -- skills and tools necessary to realize the great promise of our country. That's how I have led, and that's how I will continue to lead for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: In this time of change, some things do not change. Those are the values we try to live by: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In changing times, we will support the institutions that give our lives direction and purpose -- our families, our schools, our religious congregations. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every being counts. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for the Second Amendment which protects every Americans individual right to bear arms. (Applause.) We stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law.My opponent's words on these issues are a little muddy, but his record is plenty clear. He says he supports the institution of marriage, but voted against the Defense of Marriage Act. AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He voted against the ban on the brutal practice of partial birth abortion.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He called the Reagan years as a period of moral darkness.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: There is a mainstream in American politics, and my opponent sits on the far left bank. (Applause.) During this campaign, he can run but he cannot hide. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. I believe the most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear. We are defending the homeland. I thank the first responders who are here with us today. (Applause.) We're strengthening our intelligence. We're transforming our military. We will not have a draft. The all-volunteer army will remain an all-volunteer army. (Applause.) We are staying on the offensive. We will strike the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.) We will spread freedom and liberty, and we will prevail.Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world, the way it was some three-and-a-half years ago -- think about this. Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned horrific attacks.Because the United States of America led, Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror and is now a free nation -- (applause.) Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for its country's freedom; and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's associates and members have been brought to justice. (Applause.)We are standing with the people of Afghanistan and Iraq. I want the youngsters here to understand what has taken place -- (applause) -- what has taken place during a brief period of your life. It wasn't all that long ago that young girls couldn't go to school in Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago that their mothers were taken into the public square and whipped because they wouldn't toe the line of these ideologues of hate called the Taliban. It wasn't all that long ago that the people of that country lived in darkness. Because we acted in our own self-interest, because we acted to destroy the al Qaeda terrorists training camps, because we worked to secure ourselves, 25 million people live in freedom. They had presidential elections a couple of weekends ago in Afghanistan. (Applause.) The first voter in Afghanistan was a 19-year-old girl. (Applause.) Freedom is on the march, and the people of Afghanistan have gone from darkness to light. (Applause.)The people of Iraq will be voting for a President in January. Think how far that society has come from the day of torture chambers and mass graves. It's in our interest that we spread freedom. Free societies will be hopeful societies which no longer feed resentments and breed violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight the terrorists, instead of harboring them. Freedom will help us keep the peace we all want. Freedom is on the move, and America is more secure for it. (Applause.)So our mission is clear. Our mission is clear. We will help these countries train armies and police forces and security forces in Afghanistan and Iraq so they can do the hard work of defending their freedom, so they can stand up and fight these terrorists who are trying to stop the advance of freedom. We'll help the countries get on the path of stability and democracy as quickly as possible, and then our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)We have a great United States military, because those who wear the uniform are people of such great character and service and duty and honor. (Applause.) And I want to thank the veterans who are here today for having set such a great example for those who wear the uniform. (Applause.) And I want to thank the military families who are here for the sacrifices you have made. (Applause.) And I assure you, we'll keep the commitment we have made to the troops and their families. They will have the resources they need to complete their missions.That's why I went to the Congress in September of 2003 and asked for $87 billion of supplemental funding to support our troops in harm's way. I received great bipartisan support. Your Senators Senator Specter and Santorum, voted with me on that bill. (Applause.) It was an important piece of legislation. Most people up in Congress understood how important it was. As a matter of fact, only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against funding for our troops -- two of who were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, I want to tell you another startling statistic. When you're out gathering the vote, I want to tell you another startling statistic, a true fact. There were only four members of the United States Senate, four out of a hundred, that had voted to authorize the use of force and then voted against the funding to support our troops in harm's way -- two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: So they asked him how he could have made that vote. They asked him how he could have made that vote. And you might remember perhaps the most famous quote of the 2004 campaign. Here is what he said -- ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it.""AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: They kept asking him and he kept answering -- he must have given five or six different explanations. One of the most interesting ones of all is he finally said the whole thing was a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in harm's way. (Applause.)All elections come down to a choice, and in this, America's first presidential election since September the 11th, the security of our country as at risk in many ways different than we have ever faced before. We're in the midst of a global war against a well-trained, highly motivated enemy, an enemy that has no conscience. An enemy that hates Americans because of the very freedoms we love. The next commander-in-chief must lead us to victory in this war. Yet, you cannot win a war when you do not believe you are fighting one. (Applause.)Senator Kerry was recently asked how September the 11th had changed him. And he replied this: ""It did not change me much at all."" End quote.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: His unchanged world becomes obvious when he calls the war against terror primarily an intelligence and law enforcement operation, rather than a war which requires the full use of American strength. Senator Kerry's top foreign policy advisor questioned this is even a war at all. And here's what he said: ""We're not in a war on terror in a literal sense. It's like saying 'the war on poverty' -- it's just a metaphor."" End quote. It's a different mind-set, a different attitude. Confusing food programs with terrorist killings reveals a fundamental misunderstanding of the world we live in, of the world we face. And this is very dangerous thinking.Senator Kerry also misunderstands our battle against insurgents and terrorists in Iraq. He called Iraq a diversion from the war on terror. Let me talk about the case of one terrorist to show you how wrong this thinking is. The terrorist leader we face today in Iraq, the one responsible for car bombings and beheadings of Americans, is a man named Zarqawi. Zarqawi ran a terrorist training camp in Afghanistan until our military arrived. He then went to Iraq. He received medical care in Iraq. He plotted and planned in Iraq. To confirm where he's coming from, just the other day Zarqawi announced his allegiance to Osama bin Laden. If Zarqawi and his associates were not busy fighting American forces in Iraq, does my opponent think they would be living peaceful and productive lives? Course not. That's why Iraq is not a diversion, but a central commitment in the war on terror. (Applause.)The Senator the other day talked about the need for America to pass a global test when it comes to committing our troops.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I'm not making that up. He was standing right there when he said it. No, we'll work with our friends and allies. I'll continue to build alliances and strong coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: I believe -- I believe in the transformational power of liberty. That's what I believe. I believe liberty can transform nations. One of our friends, Laura and my friends is Prime Minister of Japan. He's a friend. I saw at the United Nations in New York. I said, listen, I'm going to be talking about you on the campaign trail, do you mind? He said, no, go ahead and talk about me. I said, okay. What he didn't -- I didn't ask him permission to tell you that Elvis is his favorite singer. (Laughter.) We've gotten to know him quite well. It probably doesn't sound much to folks out there that I would call him my friend. But remember, 60 years ago, we were at war with Japan. They were the sworn enemy of the United States of America. My dad, like many of his generation, like many of the Band of Brothers, fought against the Japanese -- people of that generation served. And your dads and granddads did the same, I'm confident.After we won the war, Harry S. Truman, President of the United States, believed that liberty could transform an enemy into an ally. That's what he believed. There was a lot of skepticism about that, a lot of doubt. There was a lot of anger because of the war, and you can understand why. Families' lives have been turned upside down because of death during the war. A lot of people would said, well, the enemy can't possibly become a democracy. But our predecessors stayed with it. And as a result of that belief, I sit down at the table today talking about how to keep the peace with Prime Minister Koizumi. Some day, an American President will be sitting down with a duly-elected leader of Iraq, talking about peace in the Middle East. And our children and our grandchildren will be better off for it. (Applause.)I believe -- I believe that millions in the Middle East plead in silence for their liberty. I believe women in the Middle East want to live in a free society. I believe mothers and fathers in the Middle East want to raise their children in a free and peaceful world. I believe all these things because freedom is not America's gift to the world; freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)For all Americans these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. This is a time that requires firm resolve, clear vision, and a deep faith in the values that makes us a great nation.None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It is a day I will never forget. I will never forget the voices of those in hard hats yelling at me at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes."" I will never forget the police or firefighter coming out of the rubble who grabbed me by the arm and he looked me square in the eye, and he said, ""Do not let me down."" Ever since that day -- ever since that day, I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago -- four years ago, when I traveled your great state asking for the vote, I made a pledge that if you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I have been elected. With your help, with your hard work, I will do so for four more years.God bless. Thanks for coming. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all for coming. (Applause.) Thank you all for coming out to say hello. It is great to be in Mason City, Iowa. (Applause.) I appreciate the warm welcome. It's the home of fine corn, fine people, and fine  music. (Applause.)I'm here to ask for your help. We're less than two weeks away from voting time. And I'd like for you to get your friends and neighbors and remind them we have a duty in democracy to vote. (Applause.) And get them headed to the polls, and remind them, if they want a safer America and a stronger America and a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney back in office. (Applause.)My only regret is that Laura is not traveling with me today.AUDIENCE: Awww --THE PRESIDENT: That is generally the reaction. (Laughter.) Why didn't you send her and you stay at home. (Laughter.) She was a public school librarian when I met her for the second time. See, we were in the 7th grade together in San Jacinto Junior High in Midland, Texas. She became a public school librarian, and I met her again. I said, will you marry me. She said, fine, just so long as I never have to give a speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you got a deal. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that deal. She is giving a lot of speeches, and when she does the American people see a warm, compassionate, great First Lady. (Applause.) I am traveling in Iowa today to give you reasons why I think you ought to put me back into office, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)This morning in the Oval Office I met with our fine Vice President, Dick Cheney. I was there, of course, to discuss national security matters before we hit the campaign trail today. I'm proud of my Vice President. I admit to you, he does not have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) You'll be happy I didn't pick him because of his hairdo. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his judgment, his experience, and his ability to get the job done. (Applause.)I am proud of your United States Congressman, Tom Latham. He is doing an excellent job. (Applause.) You're proud to call him Congressman; I'm proud to call him friend. (Applause.) And I appreciate his wife, Kathy, as well. She's a fine, fine lady. I'm also proud to be working with your United States Senator, Charles Grassley. I told him when I saw him -- (applause.) I saw him the other day in Cedar Rapids. I took him aside and I said, listen, the South Lawn at the White House has got a lot of grass. (Laughter.) I'm proud to work with him, and with your help, I'll continue to work with him for four more years. (Applause.)I want to thank the House Majority Leader, Chuck Gipp, who's with us. I want to thank all those who serve in state and local government. I appreciate the Mayor being here. I'm honored that the Mayor is taking time out to be here. My only advice to the Mayor is to pave the potholes. (Laughter and applause.) I appreciate your service, Mayor.I want to thank all the grassroots activists. I thank you for what you have done and what you're going to do -- put up the signs, get on the phone, turn people out to vote, talk to your friends and neighbors, go to your community centers, go to your coffee shops, go to your houses of worship, remind people we have a duty. With your help, we will carry Iowa and win a great victory in November. (Applause.)Listen, in the last few years the American people have come to know me. They know my blunt way of speaking. I got that from my mother. (Laughter.) They know that sometimes I mangle the English language. I got that from my dad. (Laughter.) Americans also know I tell you exactly what I'm going to do, and I keep my word. (Applause.) When I came into office, the stock market had been in serious decline for six months. That had been an indication that our economy was sliding into a recession. To help families and to get this economy growing again, I pledged to reduce taxes. I kept my word. (Applause.)The results are clear. The recession was one of the shallowest in American history. Over the last three years our economy has grown at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. Today, the home ownership rate is at an all-time high in America. (Applause.) In the past 13 months, we've added more than 1.9 million new jobs. The unemployment rate in America is 5.4 percent, lower than the average rate of the 1970s, 1980s and the 1990s. (Applause.) Farm income is up. The unemployment rate in Iowa is 4.5 percent. This economy is moving forward and we're not going to go back to the days of tax and spend. (Applause.)To keep this economy strong we'll continue to stand with our farmers. I understand a good national economy depends on a good farm economy. (Applause.) I signed a good farm bill that's helping our farmers. We're phasing out the death tax to help our farmers keep their farms from generation to generation. (Applause.) We have extended contracts in the conservation reserve program, to help protect our wildlife, to help improve land and to help our farm families. We're expanding broad-band technology to make high-speed Internet access available to all Americans by 2007. We're opening up markets for Iowa farmers all across the world. (Applause.)We are pursuing an energy strategy that encourages conservation, increased domestic production and renewables like ethanol and biodiesel. (Applause.) When I campaigned in your state in 2000, I told the people of Iowa I support ethanol. I kept my word. (Applause.) To make sure jobs remain here, America must be the best place in the world to do business. That means less regulations on our job creators. That means we must do something about the frivolous lawsuits that make it hard for small business owners to expand their companies. (Applause.) We will open up markets around the world. We will make sure that we're wise about how we spend your money. And to make sure this economy continues to grow, we must keep your taxes low. (Applause.)Now, my opponent has his own history on the economy. (Laughter.) In 20 years as a Senator from Massachusetts, he has built a record of -- a senator from Massachusetts. (Laughter and applause.) He has voted to raise taxes 98 times.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I want to remind you he voted to tax Social Security benefits.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He's been there for 20 years, that's about five tax increases -- five tax increases every year. I'd call that a predictable pattern. I'd call that an indicator. (Applause.) He looked in the camera the other night with a straight face and said, he's not going to raise taxes on anyone who earns less than $200,000. The problem with that is to keep that promise he would have to break almost all of his other ones. (Applause.) He has proposed more than $2.2 trillion in new federal spending -- that's trillion with a ""The."" (Laughter.) And so they asked him, how are you going to pay for it? He said, oh, I'll just tax the rich. Now, we've heard that before, haven't we?AUDIENCE: Yes!THE PRESIDENT: See, you can't raise enough money by raising the top two brackets to pay for $2.2 trillion of new spending. There is a gap between what he has promised and what he can deliver. And guess who usually has to fill that gap?AUDIENCE: We do!THE PRESIDENT: There's also something else wrong with taxing the rich. The rich hire lawyers and accountants for a reason -- (laughter) -- to slip the tab and stick you with the bill. The good news is we're not going to let him tax you, we're going to carry Iowa and win in November. (Applause.)When I came into public office too many republic [sic] schools were passing children, grade to grade, year after year, without learning the basics. So I pledged to restore accountability to our schools and to end the soft bigotry of low expectations. (Applause.) I kept my word. (Applause.) The No Child Left Behind Act is a solid piece of reform. We're now seeing results. Our children are making sustained gains in reading and math. We're closing achievement gaps all across our country, and we're not going to go back to the days of low expectations and mediocrity in our classrooms. (Applause.)When I came into office we had a problem in Medicare -- medicine was changing, but Medicare was not. And that was a problem. Let me give you an example. Medicare would pay tens of thousands of dollars for heart surgery, but not one dime for the prescription drug that could prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. That was not fair to our seniors or our taxpayers. In 2002 I remember campaigning around your state saying that we were going to reform Medicare so rural hospitals would be treated more fairly in the state of Iowa. I kept my pledge. (Applause.) I kept my word. Iowa's rural hospitals are being treated fairly. Thanks to the good work of Senator Chuck Grassley and Congressman Tom Latham, beginning in 2006, all seniors will be able to get prescription drug coverage under Medicare. (Applause.)There's more to do in health care. We need to make sure health care is available and affordable for all our citizens. We need a safety net for those with the greatest needs. We'll do more to make sure our poor children are fully subscribed in our programs for low-income families so they get the health care they need. I believe in community health centers, places where the poor and the indigent can get health care. Since I took office we have opened or expanded more than 600 community health centers. We've provided care to more than 3 million patients, including many from farm communities. In a new term, we'll open or expand another 600 centers, and we will make sure every poor county in America has a community or rural health center. (Applause.)Most of the uninsured today work for small businesses. Small businesses are having trouble affording health care. To help workers get the health care they need we must allow small businesses to join together so they can buy insurance at the same discounts that big companies can buy insurance. (Applause.) We will expand health savings accounts so workers and small businesses are able to pay lower premiums, and people can save tax-free in a health care account they call their own.To make sure health care is available and affordable, we must do something about the junk lawsuits that are running up the cost of medicine and running good doctors out of practice. (Applause.) By forcing doctors to practice defensive medicine, these medical lawsuits cost the federal government $28 billion a year. That means they cost you $28 billion a year. Lawsuits drive up insurance premiums, which drives good doctors out of practice. I've talked to too many OB/GYNs, for example, who are having to leave their practice because of lawsuits. And I've met too many women who are worried about the quality of the health care they receive because of lawsuits. You cannot be pro-doctor and pro-patient and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) I think you have to choose. My opponent made his choice and he put a personal injury trail lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice. I'm standing with the docs and the patients. I'm for medical liability reform now. (Applause.)We have big differences in this campaign when it comes to health care. My opponent has laid out one that calls for a bigger and more intrusive government. Now, the other day, in the debate, he looked right in the camera again, and he said this, he said, ""The government has nothing to do with it."" I could barely contain myself. (Laughter.) The facts are that eight out of ten people who get health care under Senator Kerry's plan would be placed on a government program. Those are the facts.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He said his plan would help small businesses, yet upon analysis, small business groups have concluded that it is an overpriced albatross that would saddle small businesses with 225 new mandates. I want to help our small businesses, and will through association health plans, but we're not going to saddle them with a bunch of new government regulations. (Applause.) My opponent wants to move in the direction of government health care. Health decisions, in my plan, will be made by doctors and patients, not by officials in Washington, D.C. He can run from his plan, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)We'll continue to promote an ownership society in America. You know, there's a saying that says no one ever washes a rental car. (Laughter.) There's a lot of wisdom in that statement. See, when you own something, you care about it. And when you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of our country. That's why we will continue to promote entrepreneurship. Every time a small business is started, someone is achieving the American Dream. (Applause.)That's why we're encouraging health savings accounts, so people can have the security of managing and owning their own health care account. That's why we'll continue to promote home ownership in America. I love it when more and more people open up the door where they live and say, welcome to my home, welcome to my piece of property. (Applause.)In a new term we'll take the next step to build an ownership society by strengthening Social Security. Now, I want to take you back to the 2002 campaign, if I might, when they ran all those ads that said, if George W. gets elected, you will not get your check. You remember those? I want you to remind your friends and neighbors that they got their Social Security checks. (Applause.) No one is going to take the Social Security check away from our seniors. (Applause.) And as far as the baby boomers like me go, we're in pretty good shape when it comes to Social Security. But we need to worry about our children and our grandchildren when it comes to the Social Security system. We need to worry about whether or not Social Security will be around when they need it. I believe we need to think differently about Social Security for our youngsters. For their sake, we must strengthen the system by allowing younger workers to save some of their own payroll accounts -- payroll taxes, in a personal savings account that they can call their own, that the government cannot take away. (Applause.)The other night my opponent said he's going to maintain the status quo when it comes to Social Security. That is unacceptable. The job of a President is to confront problems, not to pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. (Applause.) We have a different philosophy of government. On just about every issue my opponent is for more authority to the United States government. I'm for more authority to the people. (Applause.) On issue after issue, from Medicare without choices to schools with less accountability to higher taxes, he takes the side of bigger government. And there's a word for that attitude. It is called liberalism. Now, he just dismisses that word as a label. He must have seen it differently when he told a newspaper, I am liberal and proud of it. (Laughter.) There have been people who have judged people's records in politics -- the nonpartisan National Journal Magazine did a study and named him the most liberal member of the United States Senate. That takes hard work. (Laughter.) See, he can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)I have a different record and a different philosophy. I do not believe in big government and I do not believe government should be indifferent. I'm a compassionate conservative. I believe in policies that empower people to improve their lives, not try to run their lives. So we're helping men and women find the skills and tools to prosper in a time of change. We're helping people realize their dreams so they can find dignity and independence in America, and that is how I will continue to lead our country for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: In a time of change -- in this time of change, some things do not change -- the values we try to live by: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In a time of change, we must support the institutions that give our lives direction and purpose: our families, our schools, our houses of worship. We stand for a culture of live in which every person matters and every being counts. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for the Second Amendment, which protects every American's individual right to bear arms. (Applause.) We stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)My opponent's words on these issues are a little muddy, but his record is plenty clear. (Laughter.) He says he supports the institution of marriage, but he voted against the Defense of Marriage Act. He says he's -- he called himself the candidate with conservative values, but he voted against the ban on the brutal practice of partial birth abortion.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He described the Reagan years as a time of moral darkness.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: There is a mainstream in American politics, and my opponent sits on the far left bank. (Applause.) In this campaign, he can try to run from his record and his philosophy, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. The most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we've fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear. We're reforming and strengthening our intelligence gathering capabilities. We're defending the homeland. We're transforming our military. The all-volunteer army will remain an all-volunteer army. (Applause.) We're staying on the offensive. We will strike the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. We will spread freedom and liberty and we will prevail. (Applause.)Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world the way it was some three-and-a-half years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda. It's where terrorists were training to inflict great harm on America and the free world. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat, and al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned horrific attacks.But because we acted, because the United States of America was steadfast and resolved, Afghanistan is now a free nation and an ally in the war on terror. (Applause.) Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders. Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice. (Applause.) Now we're standing with the people of Afghanistan and Iraq. When America gives its word, America must keep its word. (Applause.)But I want the youngsters here to hear what is happening in the world in which you live. Think about Afghanistan three-and-a-half years ago. There were young girls there who couldn't go to schools, and their mothers were pulled in the public square and whipped if they didn't toe the line of these ideologues of hate who ran the country. They were called the Taliban. These were barbaric, brutal people. Because we acted in our own self-interest, because we upheld the doctrine that said, if you harbor a terrorist, you're equally as guilty as the terrorist, today Afghanistan is free. Millions of people voted in a presidential election. The first voter in the Afghan presidential election was a 19-year-old woman. Freedom is on the march. (Applause.)People want to be free. That's what you've got to know. People desire to be free. In Iraq, there will be elections in January. Think how far that society has come from the days of torture chambers, the days of a brutal dictator who was willing to cut the hands off people arbitrarily. Think about the difference that is from the days of the mass graves. See, free societies help us keep the peace. Free societies will be hopeful societies which no longer feed resentments and breed violence for exports. Free countries will join us in fighting these ideologues of hate, instead of supporting them. And that helps us keep the peace we all long for. (Applause.)And so our mission is clear. We will help train police and armies in Afghanistan and Iraq so people in those countries can do the hard work of defending their own freedom. We will get those countries on the path to stability and democracy as quickly as possible, and then our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)It is such an honor to be the Commander-in-Chief of such a great military. And it is a great military because of the character of the people who wear our nation's uniform. And I want to thank the veterans who are here today for having set such a great example. (Applause.)And I want to thank the military families who are here. And I want you to know that we will keep our commitment to those who wear the uniform and their families by making sure that our troops have all they need to complete their missions. That's why I went to the United States Congress in September of 2003 and asked for $87 billion in supplemental funding to support our troops in harm's way, in both Iraq and Afghanistan. I was very pleased with the overwhelming bipartisan support for that important funding request. As a matter of fact, the support was so strong that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against the funding to support our troops in combat, two of whom were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, let me remind you of a startling statistic, and I want you to remind your friends and neighbors of this startling statistic. There were only four members of the United States Senate, four out of a hundred, who voted to authorize the use of force, and then voted against the funding to support our troops in combat. Two of those four were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: So I asked him why. I asked him about that vote. And that's when he said, ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it."" Now, I don't know if a lot of folks around the coffee shops in this part of the world talk like that. (Laughter.) I doubt they do. They continued to press them. He was giving them a bunch of answers as to why he made that vote. One of the most interesting ones of all is he finally just said it was a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)This is America's first presidential election since September the 11th, 2001. The security of our country is at risk in ways different from any we have before faced. We are in the midst of a global war against a well-trained, highly motivated enemy, an enemy who hates America for the very freedoms and values we cherish most. The next Commander-in-Chief must lead us to victory in this war, and you cannot lead a war when you don't believe you're fighting one. (Applause.)Senator Kerry was recently asked how September the 11th had changed him. He replied, ""It didn't change me much at all."" And this unchanged world view becomes obvious when he calls the war against terror primarily and intelligence and law enforcement operation, rather than what I believe: a war which requires the full use of American power to keep us secure. (Applause.)Senator Kerry's top foreign policy advisor has questioned whether this is even a war at all. Here's what he said, and I quote, ""We're not in a war on terror in the literal sense. It is like saying 'the war on poverty.' It is just a metaphor."" End quote. Confusing food programs with terrorist killings reveals a fundamental misunderstanding of the war we face, and that is very dangerous thinking. (Applause.)My opponent also misunderstands our battle against insurgents and terrorists in Iraq, calling Iraq a diversion from the war on terror. The case of one terrorist shows how wrong his thinking is. The terrorist leader we face in Iraq today, the one responsible for planting car bombs and beheading Americans is a man named Zarqawi. Zarqawi ran a terrorist training camp in Afghanistan until our military coalition destroyed that camp. He then fled to Iraq where he got medical treatment and continued his plotting and planning. To confirm where he's coming from, just the other day, Zarqawi publicly announced his sworn allegiance to Osama bin Laden. If Zarqawi and his associates were not busy fighting American forces in Iraq, does Senator Kerry think he would be leading a productive and peaceful life? Of course not. And that's why Iraq is no diversion, but a central commitment in the war on terror, a place where our military is confronting and defeating terrorists overseas so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)You cannot lead our nation to decisive victory on which the security of every American family depends if you do not see the true dangers of a post-September the 11th world. The war against terror requires all our resources, all our strength. We will stay on the offense. We will improve our homeland protections. And of course, we'll continue to work with our allies and our coalition to keep us safe.Senator Kerry's view of alliance-building is to call them the coerced and the bribed, is to insult the friends who stands with us and try to placate countries who disagree with us. No, we'll work hard with all our friends and allies, but I will never give a country a veto power over our national security. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. That's what I believe. You know, I have had many conversations with Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan. That may not seem like much to some here. But it wasn't all that long ago, when you think about it, that we were at war with Japan. Japan was the sworn enemy of the United States of America. My dad fought against the Japanese; I'm confident many out here's relatives fought against the Japanese, as well. And after we won that war, Harry S. Truman, President of the United States, believed in the power of liberty to transform an enemy into an ally. There was a lot of skepticism about that during that period in our history. You can understand why. Japan couldn't conceivably become a democracy, people would say. Why do we want to help a country that inflicted such harm on the United States of America, others would say. There was pessimism and doubt.But, fortunately, predecessors of ours believed in the power of liberty to transform, and as a result of that belief, and because we helped Japan become a democracy, I now sit at the table with Prime Minister Koizumi talking about how to keep the peace we all want. Some day an American President will be sitting down the a duly-elected leader of Iraq, talking about keeping the peace in the Middle East. And our children and our grandchildren will be better off for it. (Applause.)I believe that millions in the Middle East plead in silence for their freedom. I believe women in the Middle East want to live in a free society. I believe mothers and dads in the Middle East want to raise their children in a free and peaceful environment. I believe all these things because freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)We have climbed the mountain and we see the valley below. And the valley below is one of peace and hope and optimism. You know, for all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. (Laughter.) This is a time that requires firm resolve, clear vision, and a deep faith in the values that makes us a great nation. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. I will never forget the day. I will never forget the voices of those in their hard hats yelling at me at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes."" I will never forget the look in the man's eye who grabbed me by the arm, and he said, ""Do not let me down."" Ever since that day, I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago when I traveled your great state in the caucuses, and then in the general election, I made a pledge that if you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, with your hard work coming down the stretch, I will do so for four more years. God bless. Thank you all for coming. (Applause.) I appreciate you being here. (Applause.) Thank you all. (Applause.)"
bush,2008,"Thank you all for coming today. (Applause.) I am proud to be the first sitting President ever to have visited The Villages. (Applause.) The other ones missed out on a lot. Thanks for having me. Thanks for coming. This is a huge crowd, for which I am grateful. (Applause.) I told Jeb it looks like a beautiful day in The Villages. (Applause.) He said, it's always a beautiful day in The  Villages. (Applause.)I'm traveling your state to ask for the vote. I think you got to get out amongst the people and say, I want your vote. I'm going to give you some reasons to put me back into office. I also want your help. You need to go to your friends and neighbors. Tell them we have a duty in our free society to vote. When you get them headed to the polls, remind them, if they want a safer America, a stronger America, a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney back in office. (Applause.)My one regret is that Laura is not with me today.AUDIENCE: Awww --THE PRESIDENT: I know, that's generally the reaction. (Laughter.) I'm going the give you some reasons, as I said, to put me in, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.) When I met her again -- see, we went to the 7th grade together in San Jacinto Junior High in Midland, Texas. When I met her again, she was a public school librarian. I said, will you marry me. She said, fine, just so long as I never have to give a speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you got a deal. Fortunately, she did not hold me to that promise. She's giving a lot of speeches, and when she does, the American people see a strong, warm, compassionate, great First Lady. (Applause.)I am proud of my running mate, Dick Cheney. (Applause.) I readily concede he does not have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) I did not pick him for his hairdo. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his experience and sound judgment. (Applause.)I am very proud of my brother, the Governor of Florida, Jeb Bush. (Applause.) He is a strong, consistent leader. You do not have to worry about him shifting his political thoughts because of a poll or a focus group. (Applause.) And when times were tough during the four hurricanes, Jeb led this state with resolve and compassion. (Applause.) Brother Marvin is with us today, as well, and I want to thank Marv for coming. I love to be with my family. I get great strength from my faith, my family, and my friends. (Applause.)I want to thank Carey Baker for his service, not only in the Armed Forces, but in the statehouse. (Applause.) As I came up on the stage, Mrs. Baker informed me they'll be having a child tomorrow. (Laughter.) Let's just make sure it's tomorrow. (Laughter.)I want to thank Congressman Cliff Stearns for his leadership in the House of Representatives. (Applause.) I appreciate the service of the state chief financial officer, Tom Gallagher. (Applause.) I want to thank all the other state and local officials who are here. I want to thank Ralph Reed, the Bush-Cheney '04 Southeast Regional Chair, for his leadership and friendship. I want to thank Carole Jean Jordan, who's the Republican Party Florida chairman. I want to thank all the people who are involved in grassroots politics. I want to thank those of you who are putting up the signs. I want to thank those of you who are making the phone calls. With your help, there is no doubt in my mind we will carry Florida again and win a great victory on November the 2nd. (Applause.)Finally, I want to thank my friend, Mark Wills, the country singer who has been entertaining you today. (Applause.)In the last few years, the American people have come to know me. They know my blunt way of speaking. I get that from my mother. (Laughter.) They know that sometimes I mangle the English language. I get that from my father. (Laughter.) Americans also know that I tell you exactly what I'm going to do, and I keep my word. (Applause.)I enjoyed telling the people what I was going to do during our three debates. Those were important debates because they showed the clear differences between my opponent and me. We have different records, we have very different plans for the future. My record is one of reforming education, of lowering taxes, of providing prescription drug coverage for our seniors, of improving homeland protections, and of waging an aggressive war against the ideologues of hate. (Applause.) I enjoyed the chance to lay out my vision for the future. Instead of articulating a vision or a positive agenda for the future, the Senator, my opponent, is relying on a litany of complaints and an old-style scare tactic.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: As proven by his record and a series of contradictions in this campaign, my opponent will say anything he thinks will benefit him politically at the time. (Applause.) I will do what I have said I will do. We will keep the promise of Social Security for our seniors, and there will no draft as long as I'm the President. (Applause.) On November the 2nd, the people of America will reject the politics of fear and vote for an agenda of hope and opportunity and security. (Applause.)When I came into office, the stock market had been in serious decline for six months. And then we headed into a recession. To help families and to get this economy growing again, I pledged to reduce taxes. I kept my word. (Applause.) The results are clear. The recession was one of the shallowest in American history. Over the last three years, our economy has grown at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. Today the home ownership rate in America is at an all-time high. (Applause.) In the past 13 months we've added more than 1.9 million new jobs. The unemployment rate in America is 5.4 percent, lower than the average rate of the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.) The unemployment rate in Florida is 4.5 percent. (Applause.) This economy of ours is moving forward, and we're not going to go back to the days of tax and spend. (Applause.)To make sure quality jobs are created here in America, America must be the best place in the world to do business. That means less regulations on our job creators. That means we will do something about the frivolous lawsuits that plague our small business owners.To keep jobs here, Congress needs to pass my energy plan. It's a plan that encourages conservation, a plan that encourages renewables, encourages new technologies. It's a plan that recognizes we can explore for natural gas in environmentally friendly ways. We will not drill off the coast of Florida. It's a plan that uses clean coal technology. To keep jobs here in America, America must be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)To create jobs we need to reject economic isolationism. We've opened up our markets from products for overseas, and that is good for the American consumer. See, the market works this way. If you have more products to choose from, you're likely to get that which you want at a better price and higher quality. So instead of shutting down our market, what we'll continue to do is open up other people's markets. I say to China, you treat us the way we treat you. We can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere, so long as the playing field is level. (Applause.)To make sure this economy continue to grow, we've got to be wise about how we spend your money -- and keep your taxes low. (Applause.) My opponent has his own history on the economy. In 20 years as a senator from Massachusetts, he has built the record of -- a senator from Massachusetts. (Laughter.) He voted for higher taxes 98 times in his 20 years. That's about five times a year. I would call that a predictable pattern. (Laughter.) Now the Senator is promising not to raise taxes for anyone who earns less than $200,000 a year. He said that with a straight face. (Laughter.) The problem is, to keep that promise he would have to break almost all of his other ones. He's made a lot of promises. He's promised over $2.2 trillion -- a program of new spending. He said he's going to raise the money by taxing the rich. You can't raise enough money by taxing the rich to raise $2.2 trillion. There is a gap, a gap between what he's promised and what he can raise. And guess who usually gets to fill the gap?AUDIENCE: We do!THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. You've also heard that talk before about taxing the rich. The rich hire lawyers and accountants for a reason, to slip the bill and pass it on to you. We're not going to let him tax you. We're going to carry Florida and win on November the 2nd. (Applause.)When I came in this office, our public schools had been waiting decades for hopeful reform. Fortunately, you had a governor who had been providing hopeful reform. But too many of our children were shuffled through school year after year, grade after grade, without learning the basics. I pledged to restore accountability to our schools and end the soft bigotry of low expectations, and I kept my word. (Applause.) We're seeing the results. Our children are making sustained gains in reading and math. We're closing achievement gaps all across America. And we're not going to go back to the days of low standards and mediocrity in the public schools in America. (Applause.)When we came into office, we had a problem with Medicare. Medicine was changing; Medicare was not. And let me give you an example. Many here understand what I'm talking about. Medicare would pay hundreds of thousands of dollars for heart surgery, but not one dime for the prescription drugs that could prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. That did not make any sense for people on Medicare. It didn't make any sense for the taxpayers of the country. I pledged to bring Republicans and Democrats together to strengthen and modernize Medicare for our seniors. I kept my word. (Applause.) Seniors are getting discounts on medicine, and beginning in 2006, all seniors will be able to get prescription drugs coverage under Medicare.We have more work to do when it comes to moving forward with health care. I have practical plans to make sure health care is available and affordable. We need a safety net for those with the greatest need. I believe in community health centers, places where the poor and the indigent can get good preventative and primary care. In a new term, we'll make sure every poor county in America has a community health center. (Applause.) We will do more to make sure poor children are fully subscribed in our programs for low-income families.Do you realize that half of the working uninsured work for small businesses? Small businesses are having trouble affording health care. In order to help our workers get health care, in order to help small businesses, we must allow small businesses to pool together, to join together, so they can buy insurance at the same discounts big companies are able to do. (Applause.) We will continue to expand health savings accounts so workers and small businesses are able to pay lower premiums and people can save tax-free in a health care account they call their own.To make sure health care is available and affordable, we must do something about the junk lawsuits that are running up the cost of health care and running good docs out of practice. (Applause.) By forcing doctors to practice defensive medicine, medical lawsuits cost the government, and therefore, you, about $28 billion a year. Lawsuits drive up insurance premiums, which drive good doctors out of practice. I have met too many OB/GYNs who are worried about being able to stay in practice. I have met too many of their patients, women who are worried about getting the health care they need. See, you can't be pro-doctor, pro-patient, and pro-personal injury lawyer at the same time. You have to choose. My opponent made his choice and he put a personal injury lawyer on the ticket. I made my choice. I'm standing with the docs and the patients. I am for medical liability reform now. (Applause.)And I urge you to vote for Mel Martinez in the Senate. He will join us in fighting for medical liability reform now. (Applause.)My opponent has a health care plan, a plan for bigger, more intrusive government. The other day, he tried to tell the Americans that when it comes to his health care plan -- and I quote -- ""The government has nothing to do with it."" I could barely contain myself. (Laughter.) Facts are eight out of ten people who get health care under Senator Kerry's plan would be placed on a government program. He said his plan helps small businesses, but yet, further study concluded that it is an overpriced albatross that would saddle small businesses with 225 new mandates. I have a better idea. I want to help small businesses afford health care, not saddle them with new government rules. (Applause.)The choice in this election is clear. My opponent wants to move in the direction of government-run health care. I believe health decisions should be made by patients and doctors, not by officials in Washington, D.C. He can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)I have set out policies that move this country toward a positive and optimistic vision. I believe our country can and must become an ownership society. You know, there's an old saying, no one ever washes a rental car. (Laughter.) A lot of wisdom in that statement. When you own something, you care about it. When you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of your country. That's why we'll continue to encourage ownership. Every time a small business is started, someone is achieving the American Dream. (Applause.) That's why we're encouraging health savings accounts, so people have the security of owning their own health care plan. That's why we'll continue to spread the ownership of homes all across America. I love it when more and more people from all walks of life open up the door where they live and say, welcome to my home; welcome to my piece of property. (Applause.)In a new term, we'll take the next step toward building an ownership society by strengthening Social Security. Now, let me remind you of something that took place in the 2000 campaign. They said in those political ads that if George W. gets elected, our seniors will not get their Social Security checks. You might remember those ads. I want you to remind your friends and neighbors they got their checks. Nobody is going to take away the checks of those who are now on Social Security. And baby boomers like me, we're in pretty good shape when it comes to Social Security. But we need to worry about our children and our grandchildren. We need to make sure Social Security is available for them. That is why I believe younger workers ought to be allowed to take some of their own payroll taxes and put it in a personal savings account that will earn better interest, a personal savings account they can call their own, an account the government cannot take away. (Applause.)My opponent wants to maintain the status quo when it comes to Social Security. That is unacceptable for younger Americans. I believe a President should solve problems, not pass them on to future generations or future presidents. (Applause.) On issue after issue, from Medicare without choices to schools with less accountability to higher taxes on working Americans, my opponent takes the side of more centralized control and bigger government. There's a word for that attitude. It's called liberalism.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He dismisses it as simply a label. He must have seen it differently when he told a newspaper, I am a liberal and proud of it. Don't take my word for it. Take the word of the nonpartisan National Journal Magazine that did a study of voting records and named him the most liberal member of the United States Senate. That takes a lot of hard work. (Laughter.) It's hard to be more liberal than the likes of Ted Kennedy. He can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)I have a very different record and a different philosophy. I do not believe in big government, and I do not believe that government should be indifferent. I am a compassionate conservative. I believe in policies that empower people to improve their lives, not try to run their lives. I believe we should help men and women find the skills and tools needed to prosper in a time of change. We're helping all Americans to have a future of dignity and independence, and that is now I will lead our nation for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: In this time of change -- in this time of change, some things do not change -- the values we try to live by, courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In a time of change, we must support the institutions that give our lives direction and purpose -- our families, our schools, our places of worship. We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every being counts. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. The most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear. We're defending the homeland. We're reforming and strengthening our intelligence capabilities. We're transforming our military so the all-volunteer army will remain an all-volunteer army. We're staying on the offensive. We will strike the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)We will spread freedom and liberty, and we will prevail. Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world the way it was some three-and-a-half years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat, and al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks.Because we led, because the United States of America was firm in our resolve, Afghanistan is free and is now an ally in the war on terror. (Applause.) Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders. Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice. (Applause.)We're standing with the people in Afghanistan and Iraq. I want the youngsters here to understand how profound history has changed because of the actions we took to defend ourselves. Think about Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago that the Taliban ran that country. These ideologues of hatred would not even allow young girls to go to school, and their mothers were taken into the public square and whipped if they didn't toe their line. Because we acted, because we upheld doctrine that said if you harbor a terrorist, you're equally as guilty as a terrorist, millions of citizens went to vote in a presidential election. The first voter in Afghanistan for the election of a President was a 19-year-old woman. (Applause.)Freedom is on the march. Freedom is on the march in a part of world that no one ever dreamt would be free. In Iraq, there will be presidential elections in several months. Think how far that country has come, from the days of torture rooms and mass graves. No, we're standing with those people. When American gives its word, America must keep its word. And we're standing with them. And we're standing with them because we understand that free societies in the Middle East will be hopeful societies, which no longer feed resentments and breed violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight the terrorists, instead of harboring them. And that will help us keep the peace.Our strategy -- our strategy and our mission in Afghanistan and Iraq should be clear. We'll train the armies and the police in those countries so the people of Afghanistan and the people of Iraq can do the hard work of defending their freedom. We will get those countries on the path of stability and democracy as quickly as possible. And then our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)I am proud to be the Commander-in-Chief of a great United States military. (Applause.) I want to thank the veterans who are here for having set such a great example for those who wear the uniform. (Applause.) I want to thank the military families who are here. (Applause.)The single most important responsibility is to make sure our military has all the tools and resources they need to complete their missions. That's why I went to the United States Congress in September of 2003 and asked for $87 billion of funding to support our troops in combat. I was very pleased with the overwhelming bipartisan support for that initiative. The support was so strong that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against the funding -- two of whom were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: As you're out gathering the vote, remind people of this startling fact: There were only four members of the United States Senate who voted to authorize the use of force and then voted against funding our troops in harm's way -- only four members, two of whom were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: You might remember his famous quote when they asked him about his vote, he said, I actually did vote for the $87 billion right before I voted against it.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Sunday -- Sunday was the one-year anniversary of Senator Kerry's vote against funding for our troops. My opponent's many and conflicting positions on this issue are a case study into why his contradictions call into question his credibility and his ability to lead our nation. September of 2003, as the $87 billion funding package was being debated in Congress, he said on national TV, ""It would be irresponsible to abandon our troops by voting against it."" His words. And yet one month later, he did exactly that irresponsible thing; he voted against the funding. And so we say, why, what happened to change the Senator's mind so abruptly in one month? Well, his opponent in the Democrat primary, Howard Dean, was gaining ground as an antiwar candidate. Senator Kerry apparently decided supporting the troops, even while in harm's way was not as important as shoring up his own political position.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: At a time -- at a time of a great threat to our country, at a time of great challenge in the world, the Commander-in-Chief must stand on principle, not on the shifting sands of political convenience. (Applause.)We have big differences when it comes to how to protect America. You might remember in one of the debates Senator Kerry proposed that we must pass a global test before we defend ourselves.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I didn't make that up. I was standing right there. I heard him. (Laughter.) The problem with the global test is that the Senator can never pass it. And that's dangerous in the world in which we live. I say he can't because remember 1990, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution supporting action to remove Saddam Hussein from Kuwait. The international community was united. Countries throughout the world joined the coalition. And yet even after United Nations' approval, Senator Kerry voted against the authorization for the use of force. He says removing Saddam Hussein was a mistake, during one of the debates.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He said -- well, here's how he would have solved the problem. He would have asked the United Nations to pass another United Nations Security Council resolution.AUDIENCE: BOOO!THE PRESIDENT: Precisely what Saddam Hussein wanted to hear, another resolution. Had the Senator had his way, Saddam Hussein not only would be sitting in a palace, he would have occupied Kuwait, and the world would be dangerous for it. America is better off with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. (Applause.)I'll work to build alliance. We'll work to make sure our coalition remains strong, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. I'll tell you what I mean by that. One of our friends in the international community is the Prime Minister of Japan, Koizumi. I saw him at the United Nations and said, you know, I'm talking about you everywhere you go across the country. I said, I hope you don't mind. He said, no. I didn't tell him I was going to tell you, though, that his favorite singer was Elvis. (Laughter.) Shows we're getting to know each other quite well. Doesn't seem like much, does it, that the head of Japan is a friend. But think about the history. Wasn't all that long ago, 60 years ago, that we were at war with the Japanese. Perhaps some here in the crowd was in that war. My dad, our dad, was fighting the Japanese. I guarantee you people had relatives fighting the Japanese who are here. They were the sworn enemy of the United States of America.After we won that war, Harry S. Truman, President of the United States, along with other Americans, believed in the power of liberty to transform an enemy into an ally. And there was a lot of skepticism about that. You can imagine why. Japan conceivably becoming a democracy, people would ask. Why do we worry about an enemy that has upset so many families in America? But people believe, and as a result of people having firm belief, I sit down now at the table with the Prime Minister of Japan, talking about the peace we all want. Some day, an American President will be sitting down with the duly-elected leader of Iraq, talking about keeping the peace in the Middle East, and our children and our grandchildren will be better off for it. (Applause.)I believe that millions in the Middle East plead in silence for their freedom. I believe women in the Middle East want to live in a free society. I believe the mothers and the fathers of the Middle East want to bring their children up in a free and peaceful world. I believe all these things, because freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This is not one of those times. This is a time that requires firm resolve, clear vision, and a deep faith in the values that makes this a great nation.None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I will never forget. I will never forget the voices of those in hard hats yelling at me at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes!"" I will never forget the look in the man's eyes as he grabbed me by the arm and he said, ""Do not let me down."" Ever since that day, I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago, when I traveled your great state, four years ago when I came to The Villages, for that matter, I made this pledge, that if you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, I will do so for four more years. God bless. Thanks for coming. Thank you all. Thank you all. (Applause.)"
bush,2008,"Thank you all. Thanks for coming. Thanks for the warm welcome. It is great to be back in the state of New Jersey. (Applause.) Oh, I know it might surprise some to see a Republican presidential candidate in New Jersey in late October. (Applause.) The reason why I'm here, with your help we'll carry the state of New Jersey  in November. (Applause.)We are now 15 days away from a critical election. Many important domestic issues are at stake. I have a positive, hopeful agenda for job creation, broader health coverage and better public education. Yet all the progress we hope to make depends on the security of our nation. (Applause.) America is in the middle of a global war on terror, a struggle unlike any we have ever known before. We face an enemy that is determined to kill the innocent and make our country into a battlefield. In the war on terror, there is no place for confusion and no substitute for victory. (Applause.) For the sake of our future and our freedom, we will fight this war with every asset of our national power, and we will prevail. (Applause.)Laura sends her best. (Applause.) So I asked her to marry me, she said, fine, just so long as I never have to give a political speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you got a deal. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that deal. The American people -- (applause.) A lot of Americans have seen her give a speech, and when they do they see a compassionate, strong, warm woman. (Applause.)I'm proud to have been standing on the stage with Bernie Kerik. He knows something about security. He's lived security all his life. And I want to thank him for his dedication and his service to the people of this country. (Applause.)I want to thank Congressman Jim Saxton for being here today. (Applause.) And thank you for bringing your daughter, Jennifer. (Applause.) I want to thank Congressman Scott Garrett for joining us today. Congressman, thank you. (Applause.) Congressman Frank LoBiondo, thanks for coming, Frank. (Applause.) And Tina. I want to thank Congressman Chris Smith and Marie for joining us. (Applause.) The Chairman of the Republican Party was born and raised in this county. He's doing a fabulous job. Welcome my friend, Ed Gillespie. Thanks for coming, Ed. (Applause.)I want to thank all the state senators and state House members who are here. I want to thank the grassroots activists. I want to thank you for what you're going to do during the next 15 days -- put up the signs, call the phones, get the people out to vote. We're going to win the state of New Jersey and win a great victory in November. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: During the decade of the 1990s, our times often seemed peaceful on the surface. Yet, beneath that surface were currents of danger. Terrorists were training and planning in distant camps. In 1993, terrorists made their first attack on the World Trade Center. In 1998, terrorists bombed American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. And then came the attack on the USS Cole in 2000, which cost the lives of 17 American sailors. In this period, America's response to terrorism was generally piecemeal and symbolic. The terrorists concluded this was a sign of weakness, and their plans became more ambitions [sic], and their attacks became more deadly.Most Americans still felt that terrorism was something distant, and something that would not strike on a large scale in America. That is the time that my opponent wants to go back to.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: A time when danger was real and growing, but we didn't know it. A time when some thought terrorism was only a ""nuisance.""AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: But that very attitude is what blinded America to the war being waged against us. And by not seeing the war, our government had no comprehensive strategy to fight it. September the 11th, 2001 changed all that. We realized that the apparent security of the 1990s was an illusion.The people of New Jersey were among the first to understand how the world changed. On September the 11th, from places like Hoboken and Jersey City, you could look across the Hudson River and see the Twin Towers burning. We will never forget that day, and we will never forget our duty to defend America. (Applause.)Out of the horror of that day we also saw good emerge. America has seen a new generation of heroes -- police, firefighters, members of the military. (Applause.) Americans have felt a new sense of community in neighborhoods and across our country. We've been reminded that all of us are a part of a great American story that is larger than our individual lives. And we have been reminded of our solemn responsibility to defend freedom.September the 11th also changed the way we should look at national security. But not everyone realizes it. The choice we face in this election, the first presidential election since September the 11th, is how our nation will defeat this threat. Will we stay on the offensive against those who want to attack us --AUDIENCE: Yes!THE PRESIDENT: -- or will we take action only after we are attacked?AUDIENCE: No!THE PRESIDENT: Will we make decisions in the light of September the 11th, or continue to live in the mirage of safety that was actually a time of gathering threats? And in this time of choosing, I want all Americans to know you can count on me to fight our enemies and defend our freedom. (Applause.)Winning the war on terror requires more than tough-sounding words repeated in the election season. America needs clear, moral purpose and leaders who will not waver, especially in the tough times. (Applause.) And winning the war on terror requires a strategy for victory. Unlike my opponent, I understand the struggle America faces and I have a strategy to win. (Applause.)Our first duty in the war on terror is to protect the homeland. This morning at the White House, I signed a strong law that will make our nation more secure. With the 2005 Homeland Security Appropriations Act, we are providing essential funding for Coast Guard patrols and port security, for the Federal Air Marshal program, and for technology that will defend aircraft against missiles. We're adding new resources to patrol our borders and to verify the identity of foreign visitors to America. We need to know who's coming in and out of our country.The new law includes vital money for first responders, and for better security of chemical facilities and nuclear plants and water treatment plants and bridges and subways and tunnels. All these measures show the unwavering commitment of our government. We will do everything in our power to protect the American people. (Applause.)The law I signed today is part of a broad effort to defend America against new dangers. After September the 11th we created the Department of Homeland Security to make sure our government agencies are working together. We're transforming the FBI into an agency whose primary focus is stopping terrorism. Through Project BioShield, we are developing new vaccines and treatments against biological attacks. We've trained more than a half million first responders across America. (Applause.)To protect America, we passed the Patriot Act, giving law enforcement many of the same tools to fight terrorists that they already had to fight drug cartels and organized crime. (Applause.) Since September the 11th, law enforcement professionals have stopped terrorist activities in Columbus, Ohio; San Diego, California; Portland, Oregon; Seattle, Washington; Buffalo, New York and other places, including New Jersey, where we apprehended an arms dealer who was allegedly trying to sell shoulder-fired missiles to terrorists. (Applause.)My opponent voted for the Patriot Act, but now he wants to weaken it. There are plenty of safeguards in this law, making sure that civil liberties are protected and searches are authorized by court order. By seeking to dilute the Patriot Act, my opponent is taking the eye off the ball. The danger to America is not the Patriot Act, or the good people who use it; the danger to America is the terrorists. And we will not let up in this fight. (Applause.)To protect America, our country needs the best possible intelligence. Chairman Tom Kean and other members -- (applause) -- and other members of the September the 11th Commission made thoughtful and valuable recommendations on intelligence reform. We are already implementing the vast majority of those recommendations that can be enacted without a vote of Congress. We're expanding and strengthening the capabilities of the CIA. We've established the Terrorist Threat Integration Center so we can bring together all the available intelligence on terrorist threats to one place. But other changes require new laws. Congress needs to create the position of the National Intelligence Director and take other measure to make our intelligence community more effective. These reforms are necessary to stay ahead of the threats. I urge Congress to act quickly, so I can sign them into law. (Applause.)My opponent has taken a different approach, and it shows in his record. Just one year after the first attack on the World Trade Center in 1993, Senator Kerry proposed a $6 billion cut in the nation's intelligence budget.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: But the majority of his colleagues ignored his irresponsible proposal. In 1995, he tried to cut intelligence funding again -- and this time he could not get a single member of the United States Senate to support his bill. (Applause.) And that's an important difference between us. Senator Kerry has a record of trying to weaken American intelligence. I am working every day to strengthen American intelligence. (Applause.)In a free and open society, it is impossible to protect against every threat. So, second, we must pursue a comprehensive strategy against terror. The best way to prevent attacks is to stay on the offense against the enemy overseas. (Applause.) We are waging a global campaign from the mountains of Central Asia to the deserts of the Middle East, and from the Horn of Africa to the Philippines. (Applause.) These efforts are paying off. Since September the 11th, 2001, more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice. (Applause.) The rest of them know we're coming after them. (Applause.)After September the 11th, we set a new direction for American policy and enforced a doctrine that is clear to all: If you support or harbor terrorists, you're equally guilty of terrorist murder. (Applause.) We've destroyed the terror camps that train thousands of killers in Afghanistan. We removed the Taliban from power. We have persuaded governments in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to recognize the enemy and join the fight. We ended the regime of Saddam Hussein, which sponsored terror. (Applause.) Iraq's new government under Prime Minister Allawi is hunting down terrorists in Iraq.We sent a message to Libya, which has now given up weapons of mass destruction programs and handed nuclear materials and equipment over to the United States. (Applause.) We have acted, through diplomacy and force, to shrink the area where the terrorists can operate freely, and that strategy has the terrorists on the run. (Applause.)My opponent has a fundamental misunderstanding on the war on terror. A reporter recently asked Senator Kerry how September the 11th changed him. He replied, ""It didn't change me much at all.""AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: His unchanged world view is obvious from the policies he still advocates. He has said this war is ""primarily an intelligence and law enforcement operation."" He has declared, we should not respond to threats until they are -- quote -- ""imminent."" He has complained that my administration -- quote -- ""relies unwisely on the threat of military preemption against terrorist organizations."" Let me repeat that. He says that preemptive action is ""unwise,"" not only against regimes, but even against terrorist organizations.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Senator Kerry's approach would permit a response only after America is hit.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: This kind of September the 10th attitude is no way to protect our country. (Applause.) The war on terror is a real war, with deadly enemies, not simply a police operation. In an era of weapons of mass destruction, waiting for threats to arrive at our doorsteps is to invite disaster. Tyrants and terrorists will not give us polite notice before they attack our country. As long as I'm the Commander-in-Chief, I will confront dangers abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)The case of one terrorist shows what is at stake. The terrorist leader we face in Iraq today, the one responsible for beheading American hostages, the one responsible for many of the car bombings and attacks against Iraq is a man named Zarqawi. Before September the 11th, Zarqawi ran a camp in Afghanistan that trained terrorists in the use of explosives and poisons, until coalition forces destroyed that camp. (Applause.) He fled to Saddam Hussein's Iraq, where he received medical care and set up operations with some 2,000 terrorist associates. He operated in Baghdad and worked with associates in northern Iraq. He ran camps to train terrorists, and conducted chemical and biological experiments, until coalition forces arrived and ended those operations. (Applause.) With nowhere to operate openly, Zarqawi has gone underground and is making a stand in Iraq.Here, the difference between my opponent and me is very clear. Senator Kerry believes that fighting Zarqawi and other terrorists in Iraq is a ""diversion"" from the war on terror. I believe that fighting and defeating these killers in Iraq is a central commitment in the war on terror. (Applause.)If Zarqawi and his associates were not busy fighting American forces in Iraq, does Senator Kerry think they would be leading productive and peaceful lives? (Laughter.) Clearly, these killers would be plotting and acting to murder innocent civilians in free nations, including our own. By facing these terrorists far away, our military is making the United States of America more secure. (Applause.)Third, to win the war on terror, America must work with allies and lead the world with clarity. And that is exactly what we are doing. The flags of 64 nations fly at U.S. Central Command Headquarters in Tampa, Florida, representing coalition countries that are working openly with us in the war on terror. (Applause.) Dozens more are helping quietly in important ways. Today, all 26 NATO nations have personnel either in Iraq, Afghanistan, or both. America's allies are standing with us in the war on terror, and we are grateful. (Applause.)My opponent promises that he would do better with our allies. Yet, he's decided that the way to build alliances is to insult our friends. As a candidate for President, Senator Kerry has managed to offend or alienate almost every one of America's fighting allies in the war on terror. He has called the countries serving alongside us in Iraq -- quote -- ""a trumped-up ... coalition of the bribed, the coerced, the bought, and the extorted.""AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He has dismissed the sacrifice of 14 nations that have lost forces in Iraq, calling those nations ""window dressing."" In our debate a few weeks ago, he declared, ""when we went in [to Iraq], there were three countries -- Great Britain, Australia, and the United States."" He left out Poland, one of the first countries to see combat on the first days of hostilities in Iraq. He never shows respect for some of the 30 nations that are serving courageously in Iraq today. (Applause.)Senator Kerry even has disregarded the contributions of Iraqis who are fighting for their freedom. When he speaks of coalition casualties in Iraq, he doesn't count the hundreds of Iraqis who have given their lives fighting the terrorists and the insurgents. When Iraq's Prime Minister came to Washington to address Congress last month, Senator Kerry did not show up. Instead, he called a press conference and questioned the Prime Minister's credibility. The Prime Minister of Iraq is a brave man, who survived the assassins of Saddam -- (applause.) The Prime Minister of Iraq deserves the respect of the world, not the scorn of a politician. (Applause.)As part of his foreign policy, Senator Kerry has talked about applying a ""global test.""AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: As far as I can tell, it comes down to this: Before we act to defend ourselves, he thinks we need permission from foreign capitals.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Yet, even the Gulf War coalition in 1991 did not pass Senator Kerry's global test. Even with the United Nations' approval, he voted against removing Saddam Hussein from Kuwait.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: If that vast, U.N.-supported operation did not pass his test, nothing ever could. (Applause.) Senator Kerry's global test is nothing more than an excuse to constrain the actions of our own country in a dangerous world. (Applause.)I believe in strong alliances. I believe in respecting other countries and working with them and seeking their advice. But I will never submit our national security decisions to a veto of a foreign government. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: Fourth -- fourth, we will win the war on terror and make America safer by advancing the cause of freedom and democracy. Free societies are hopeful societies, which do not nurture bitterness, or the ideologies of terror and murder. Free governments in the broader Middle East will fight the terrorists, instead of harboring them. And this is why a free Iraq and a free Afghanistan are vital to peace in that region, and vital to the security interests of our country.After decades of tyranny in the broader Middle East, progress toward freedom will not come easily. Yet, that progress is coming faster than many would have said possible. (Applause.) Across a troubled region, we are seeing a movement toward elections, greater rights for women, and open discussion of peaceful reform. The election in Afghanistan less than two weeks ago was a landmark event in the history of liberty. (Applause.) That election was a tremendous defeat for the terrorists. (Applause.)My opponent has complained that we are trying to -- quote -- ""impose"" democracy on people in that region. Is that what he sees in Afghanistan, unwilling people have democracy forced upon them? We removed the Taliban by force, but democracy is rising in that country because the Afghan people, like everywhere, want to live in freedom. (Applause.)No one forced them to register by the millions, or stand in long lines at polling places. On the day of that historic election, an Afghan widow brought all four of her daughters to vote alongside her. (Applause.) She said this -- she said, ""When you see women here lined up to vote, this is something profound ... I never dreamed ... this day would come."" But that woman's dream finally arrived, as it will one day across the greater Middle East. (Applause.) Thank you.The dream of freedom is moving forward in Iraq. The terrorists know it, and they hate it, and they fight it. And we can expect more violence as Iraq moves toward free elections. Yet, every day in Iraq, our coalition is defeating the enemy's strategic objectives. The enemy seeks to disrupt the march toward democracy. But an Iraqi independent electoral commission is up and running, political parties are planning campaigns, voter registration will begin next month -- and free and fair Iraqi elections will be held on schedule this coming January. (Applause.)The enemy seeks to establish sanctuaries in Iraq from which to commit acts of terror. But Iraqi and coalition forces are on the offensive in Fallujah and North Babil, and have restored government control in Samarra, Tall Afar, and Najaf. The enemy wants to make Iraqis afraid to join security forces. But every week, more and more Iraqis answer the call to arms. More than 100,000 soldiers, police and border guards are already trained, equipped and bravely serving their country. And well over 200,000 will be in place by the end of 2005. (Applause.) The enemy seeks to break the will of the Iraqi people. But as Prime Minister Allawi told the Congress, Iraqis are hopeful, optimistic and determined to prevail in their struggle for liberty. (Applause.)After the enemy has failed in so many goals, what can these killers do now? They can fill up our TV screens with horrible images of suicide bombings and beheadings. These scenes are chaotic and horrific, but they're not a complete picture of what's happening in Iraq. A recent poll found that more than 75 percent of Iraqis want to vote, and they have confidence in the electoral progress. And more than 75 percent are hopeful about the future of their country. The violent acts of a few will not divert Iraqis and our coalition from the mission we have accepted. Iraq will be free, Iraqis will be secure and the terrorists will fail. (Applause.)My opponent has a different outlook. While America does the hard work of fighting terror and spreading freedom, he has chosen the easy path of protest and defeatism. He refuses to acknowledge progress, or praise the growing democratic spirit in Iraq. He has not made democracy a priority of his foreign policy. But what is his strategy, his vision, his answer? Is he content to watch and wait, as anger and resentment grow for more decades in the Middle East, feeding more terrorism until radicals without conscience gain the weapons to kill without limit? Giving up the fight might seem easier in the short run, but we learned on September the 11th that if violence and fanaticism are not opposed at their source, they will find us where we live. America is safer today because Afghanistan and Iraq are fighting terrorists instead of harboring them. (Applause.) And I believe future generations of Americans will be spared violence and fear as democracy and hope and governments that oppose terror multiply across the Middle East. (Applause.)Victory in the war on terror requires victory in Iraq. (Applause.) If a terror regime were allowed to re-emerge in Iraq, the terrorists would find a home, a source of funding and vital support. They would correctly conclude that free nations do not have the will to defend themselves. When Iraq becomes a free society at the heart of the Middle East, an ally in the war on terror, and a model for hopeful reform in a region that needs hopeful reform, the terrorists will suffer a crushing defeat and every free nation will be more secure. (Applause.)Unfortunately, Senator Kerry does not share our commitment to victory in Iraq. For three years -- depending on the headlines, the poll numbers and political calculation -- he has taken almost every conceivable position on Iraq.AUDIENCE: Flip-flop! Flip-flop! Flip Flop!THE PRESIDENT: First, he said Saddam Hussein was a threat, and he voted for the war. Then he voted against funds for bullets and body armor for the troops he had voted to send into battle.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He declared himself an anti-war candidate. Months later he said that knowing everything we know now, he would have still voted for the war. Then he said the war was a ""mistake,"" an ""error,"" or ""diversion."" Having gone back and forth so many times, the Senator from Massachusetts has now flip-flopped his way to a dangerous position. My opponent -- my opponent finally has settled on a strategy, a strategy of retreat.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He has talked about artificial timetables to pull our troops out of Iraq. He has sent the signal that America's overriding goal in Iraq would be to leave, even if the job is not done.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And that approach would lead to a major defeat in the war on terror. So long as I'm the Commander-in-Chief, America will never retreat in the face of the terrorists. (Applause.) Thank you.We will -- we will keep our word to the Iraqi people. We'll make sure Iraqi forces can defend their country. And then American troops will return home, with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)On each of the four commitments needed to prevail in the war on terror, there is a clear choice before the American people. My opponent wants to weaken the Patriot Act, and has a history of trying to undermine our intelligence services. I will take every necessary measure to protect the homeland. (Applause.) The Senator wants to wage the war on terror on the defensive. I will take the fight to the enemy. (Applause.) The Senator insults our friends in the world and wants to please a few critics. I'm working with our friends for the sake of freedom and security. (Applause.) The Senator is skeptical and pessimistic about democracy in Iraq, and critical of our efforts in the broader Middle East. I know that the advance of freedom is the path to security and peace. (Applause.)In all these areas, my opponent's views would make America less secure and the world more dangerous. And none of these positions should come as a surprise. Over a 20-year career in the United States Senate, Senator Kerry has been consistently wrong on the major national security issues facing our country. The Senator who voted against the $87 billion for our troops in Afghanistan and Iraq is the same Senator who has voted against vital weapons systems during his entire career. He tried to cancel the Patriot missile, which shot down scud missiles in Operation Desert Storm. He opposed the B-1 bomber, which was critical to victory in the Afghan campaign. He opposed the B-2 stealth bomber, which delivered devastating air strikes on Taliban positions. He opposed the modernized F-14D, which we used against terrorists in Tora Bora. He opposed the Apache helicopter, which destroyed enemy tanks and anti-aircraft missile launchers in Iraq.The Senator who is skeptical of democracy in Iraq also spoke with sympathy for a communist dictator in Nicaragua in the 1980s, and criticized the democracy movement as ""terrorism."" His misguided policies would have impeded the spread of freedom in Central America. The Senator who claims the world is more dangerous since America started fighting the war on terror is the same Senator who said that Ronald Reagan's policies of peace through strength actually made America less safe.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: The same Senator who said the Reagan presidency was eight years of ""moral darkness"" --AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: In this campaign, Senator Kerry can run from his record, but he cannot hide. (Applause.) Thank you.The Senator's long record shows a clear pattern on national security. He has consistently opposed a stronger military. He has consistently looked for excuses to constrain American power. He has consistently shown poor judgment on the great issues of war and peace. When one senator among a hundred holds a policy of weakness, it doesn't make a lot of difference. But the presidency is an office of great responsibility and consequence. (Applause.)I have a record in office, as well. And all Americans have seen that record. September the 4th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I will never forget. Bernie might remember the workers in hard hats that were yelling at me and yelling at us, ""Whatever it takes."" A man grabbed me by the arm, just coming out of the rubble and he said, ""Do not let me down."" I have a responsibility that goes on. I wake up every morning thinking about how to make our country more secure. I acted again and again to protect the American people. I will never relent in defending our country, whatever it takes. (Applause.)In a new term --AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: In a new term as your President, we will finish the work we have started. We will stand up for terror -- we will stand up for freedom. And on November the 2nd, my fellow Americans, I ask that you stand with me. (Applause.)God bless. Thank you all. (Applause.)"
bush,2008,"Thank you all. (Applause.) Okay. It's great to be back in Oshkosh. My only regret is I don't have time to drive by Leon's. (Applause.) Laura and I are thrilled to be here. We're glad to be back in Wisconsin. (Applause.) The enthusiasm in this state is high. With your help -- (applause.) With your help, with your hard work, there is no doubt in my mind we will carry Wisconsin on November  the 2nd. (Applause.)I want to -- I am traveling with very good company today. (Applause.) So when I asked Laura to marry me, when I asked her to marry me, she said, okay, I will, just so long as -- so long as I never have to give a speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you got a deal. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to the deal. She's giving a lot of speeches. The American people have come to know Laura as a compassionate, warm, great First Lady. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Laura! Laura! Laura!THE PRESIDENT: I know my running mate has been in the neighborhood recently.AUDIENCE: Booo! Flip-flop! Flip-flop!THE PRESIDENT: He thought he was going over to Lambert Field. (Laughter.) One of these days I'm going to make it to Lambeau Field and thank the Packers for being -- setting such good examples for our kids. I'm proud of Dick Cheney. (Applause.) Now, look, I admit it, he doesn't have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) I didn't pick him because of his hair. I picked him because of his judgment, his experience, his ability to get the job done for the American people. (Applause.)I want to thank your Congressman, Tom Petri. He's a fine man. I appreciate you coming, Congressman. (Applause.) I see the Chairman over there, Jim Sensenbrenner. Thanks for coming, Chairman. (Applause.) Finely, we're proud to be here with Mark Green, Congressman Mark Green. (Applause.) I appreciate you guys coming. You need to vote for Tim Michels for the United States Senate. (Applause.) He wisely married Barbara. (Laughter.) I know somebody else who made the right choice. (Laughter.)I really appreciate the Experimental Aircraft Association for allowing us to use this hangar. You're famous in Oshkosh, by gosh. (Laughter.) One reason why is your airplanes. Another reason why is because of the good people who live here. I'm honored you all came out to say hello. Thanks for being here. (Applause.)I want to thank Jack Voight, the State Treasurer. I appreciate the Speaker being here. I want to thank all the local officials. I want to thank my friend, Rick Draper. I want to thank the grassroots politics -- politicians, the people who are putting up the signs and making the phone calls, the volunteers. (Applause.) I know many of you are working hard and I thank you for that. It's takes a lot of hard work to get this many people out. But there's more hard work to be done. Laura and I will be campaigning alongside of you. Work hard; we will win in November. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We're working -- we're coming from the west. We were in Oregon this morning; then we stopped off in Iowa, and fortunately, get to come to Wisconsin today. And one of the reasons we're coming west to east is, you might remember, we had a debate or two recently. (Applause.) I enjoyed those debates. (Applause.) Those debates give us a chance to express or opinions, and they show the stark differences between my opponent and me. See, we have different records and we have different plans for the future.My record is one of reforming education, lowering taxes, providing prescription drugs for our seniors, improving homeland protections, and waging aggressive war against the ideologues of hate. (Applause.) The Senator's record is 20 years of out-of-the-mainstream politics, out-of-the-mainstream votes, without many significant reforms or results to show for it. The records are important because our country faces many challenges, and the next President must recognize the need to reform and to be able to achieve reform. On issue after issue, from jobs to health care to the need to strengthen Social Security, my opponent has failed to recognize the changing realities of today's world and the need for fundamental reforms.You know, in the final debate, I talked about the link between jobs and education. (Applause.) I believe when you're talking about jobs, you need to be talking about educating the people, so they can fill the jobs of the 21st century. (Applause.) He said during that debate I switched away from jobs and started talking about education. Well, yes. Good jobs start with good education in America. (Applause.)When it comes to health care, once again the other night, he said with a straight face, that his health care plan was not a government plan. I could barely contain myself. Twenty-two million new people would enroll on a government program under his plan. That would be the largest increase in government health care ever.AUDIENCE: Booo!AUDIENCE MEMBER: Who pays for it?THE PRESIDENT: Yes. Eighty percent of the newly insured for his plan would be placed on a government program like Medicaid. That's not the way to handle health care in America.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He said, well, his plan would help small businesses. Yet when you look at his plan, just like some of these analysts have done, they concluded that Senator Kerry's plan would be an overpriced albatross, which would saddle small businesses with 225 new mandates.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I have a different view -- health care must be available and affordable and portable to help small businesses, and we don't need to saddle them with a bunch of government rules. (Applause.)Finally, talking about change, we need to do something about Social Security. And yet in the debate, my opponent said, if later on, after a period of time, we fine that Social Security is in trouble -- well, then he'll call a meeting of experts. (Laughter.) Social Security is fine for our seniors. You might remember the 2000 campaign here in Wisconsin, when they said if George W. gets elected, the seniors won't get their checks. Do you remember that?AUDIENCE: Yes!THE PRESIDENT: Well, the seniors got their checks. (Applause.) And the seniors will continue to get their checks. (Applause.)But we have trouble for our children and our grandchildren when it comes to Social Security. I think we need to think differently from the status quo. Youngsters ought to be able to take some of their own payroll taxes and set up a personal savings account, an account they call their own. (Applause.) It is the President's job to confront problems, not to pass them on to future generations and future Presidents. (Applause.)The last few years, the American people have got to know me. They know my blunt way of speaking. (Applause.) I get that from my mother. (Laughter.) They know I sometimes mangle the English language. (Laughter.) I get that from my father. (Laughter.) Americans also know I tell you exactly what I'm going to do, and I keep my word. (Applause.)When I came into office, the stock market had been in serious decline for six months, and the economy was headed into a recession. To help families and to get this economy going again, I pledged to reduce taxes. I kept my word. (Applause.) The recession was one of the shallowest in American history. Over the last three years, our economy has grown at the fastest rate of any major industrialized nation. The home ownership rate in America is at an all-time high incomes are up. (Applause.) Farm incomes are up. The past 13 months we've added 1.9 million new jobs. The unemployment rate across America is 5.4 percent. That's lower than the average of the 1970s, the 1980s and the 1990s. (Applause.) The unemployment rate in the great state of Wisconsin is 4.8 percent. (Applause.)This economy is moving forward, and we have more work to do. To keep this economy strong, I'll continue to stand behind our farmers, like our dairy farmers. (Applause.) I signed a good farm bill. It's a farm bill that promoted conservation on our farms and ranches. It's a farm bill that recognizes that by opening up markets, our farmers can make a good living. We want to be selling Wisconsin products all around the world. (Applause.)I'll continue to promote good agricultural policy. I'll work with Congress to renew the Milk Income Loss contract, the milk program, which is vital to Wisconsin's dairy farmers. We'll also make sure America is the best place in the world to do business. If you want jobs here in America, it's got to be the best place in the world to do business. That means less regulations on our job creators. (Applause.)We've got to do something about the junk lawsuits that are threatening the job creators in America. To keep jobs here, we need an energy plan. The Congress needs to pass the plan I sent up there a couple of years ago. It is a plan that encourages conservation. It's a plan that encourages the use of renewables like ethanol and biodiesel. It encourages clean coal technology. It encourages increased domestic production in environmentally friendly ways. To keep jobs here in America, we must be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)To keep jobs here, we've got to reject economic isolationism and open up markets. We've opened up our markets for products from overseas, and it's good for you as a consumer. If you've got more to choose from in the marketplace, you're likely to get that which you want at a better price and higher quality. That's how the market works. That's why I'm saying to places like China, you treat us the way we treat you; you open up your markets. See, we can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere, so long as the rules are fair. (Applause.)To create jobs here and to keep this economy growing, we've got to be wise about how we spend your money, and we've got to keep your taxes low. (Applause.) Now, my opponent has his own history on the economy.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: In 20 years as a senator from Massachusetts, he has built the record of -- a senator from Massachusetts. (Laughter and applause.) He has voted to raise taxes 98 times.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That's in 20 years. That's nearly five times a year. I'd call that a pattern. (Laughter.) See, he can run from his record, but he cannot hide. (Applause.) Now he's promising not to raise taxes for anyone who earns less than $200,000 a year. The problem is, to keep that promise, he'd have to break all of his other ones. (Laughter.) You see, he's proposed $2.2 trillion in new federal spending -- that's with a ""T."" And yet he says he's going to raise it by taxing the rich. That only raises between $600 billion and $800 billion. And so you can see there's a tax gap. (Laughter.) Guess who usually fills the tax gap?AUDIENCE: We do!THE PRESIDENT: Yes. Let me say one other thing about this business about taxing the rich. The rich hire lawyers and accountants for a reason -- to stick you with the tab. We're not going to let him tax you. We're going to carry Wisconsin and win a great victory. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: When I came into office, our public schools had been waiting for decades for hopeful reform. Too many of our children were being shuffled through, grade after grade, year after year, without learning the basics. I pledged to restore accountability in our schools and end the soft bigotry of low expectations. (Applause.) And I kept my word. (Applause.) The No Child Left Behind Act is working. Our children are making sustained gains in reading and math. We're closing achievement gaps all around this country. We're making progress for our families. We will leave no child behind. (Applause.)There is more work to do. We'll fund early intervention programs in our high schools to help at-risk students. We'll place a new focus on math and science. Over time, we'll require a rigorous exam before graduation. By raising performance in our high schools and by expanding Pell grants for low- and middle-income families, we will help more Americans start their careers with a college diploma. (Applause.)My opponent has a history on education issues -- a history of doing almost nothing. The Senator's pledged to weaken the No Child Left Behind Act.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He's proposed diluting the accountability standards and looking at measures like teacher attendance to judge whether students are learning.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: We must have high standards. We must have high accountability measures. We must not undermine what we have passed. We have worked to move beyond the old days of mediocrity and excuses, and we're not going to go back. (Applause.)When I came into office, we had a problem with Medicare. Medicine was changing, Medicare wasn't. Take, for example this: Medicare would pay hundreds -- nearly $100,000 for a heart surgery, but would not pay one dime for the prescription drugs that could prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. Think about that. It's not right for our seniors, it's certainly not right for our taxpayers. I pledged to bring Republicans and Democrats together to strengthen and modernize Medicare for our seniors, and I kept my word. (Applause.) Seniors are already getting discounts on their medicines. Rural doctors and rural hospitals are being treated more fairly. And beginning in 2006, all seniors will be able to get prescription drug coverage in Medicare. (Applause.)We're moving forward on health care, and there's more to do. We need to make sure health care is affordable and available for all our people. We need a safety net for those with the greatest needs. I'm a big believer in community health centers where the poor and the indigent can get good primary and preventative care. We'd much rather them getting care in a community health center than an emergency room of a local hospital. (Applause.)We'll do more to make sure poor children are fully subscribed in our programs for low-income families. Most of the uninsured here in America work for small businesses. Small businesses are having trouble affording health care. In order to help our small businesses and help their workers and their families, small businesses ought to be able to pool together to be able to -- so they can buy insurance at the same discounts big businesses are able to do. (Applause.) We'll expand health savings accounts so workers and small businesses are able to pay lower premiums, and people can save tax-free in a health care account they call their own.In order to make sure health care is available and affordable, we will do something about the junk lawsuits that are running up the cost to your health care. (Applause.) To make sure health care works, we've got to do something about the lawsuits that cause the federal government's tab to go up. You see, doctors practice what's called defensive medicine because of all the lawsuits. It costs our government about $28 billion a year. It costs our economy $60 billion to $100 billion a year.I don't think you can be pro-doctor, pro-patient, and pro-plaintiff attorney at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put a personal injury lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice. I'm standing with the doctors and the patients. I am for medical liability reform now. (Applause.) In all we do to reform health care, this administration will make sure the decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by officials in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)You know, there's an old saying here -- no one ever washes a rental car. (Laughter.) A lot of wisdom in that statement. (Laughter.) When you own something, you care about it. When you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of your country. That's why I will continue to promote an ownership society in America. (Applause.) We want our younger workers to be able to own a piece of the Social Security system so it will be available for them when they retire. We want more people owning their own business. Every time somebody starts a small business in America, they are achieving a piece of the American Dream. (Applause.)We will continue to expand ownership to every corner of our country. I've told you home ownership rates are at an all-time high. We want more people opening up the door where they live, saying, welcome to my home; welcome to my piece of property. (Applause.)On issue after issue, from Medicare without choices to schools with less accountability to higher taxes, my opponent takes the side of more centralized government. There's a word for that attitude -- it's called liberalism.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He dismisses that as a label. He must have seen it differently when he told a newspaper, I'm a liberal and I'm proud of it. (Laughter.) A nonpartisan journal did a study that named him the most liberal member of the United States Senate. And that's going a long way with that bunch. (Laughter.)I have a different record and a different view and a different philosophy. I don't believe in big government and I don't believe in indifferent government. I'm what you would call a compassionate conservative. (Applause.) I believe in policies that empower people to improve their lives. I don't believe in policies that try to run people's lives. (Applause.) I trust the people. My opponent trusts the government.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: We've done everything we can to help people, stand beside people, to help them have a future of dignity and independence. And that's how I'll continue to lead our nation for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: In this time of change, there's some things that do not change -- the values we try to live by: reverence and integrity, courage and compassion. In a time of change, we all must support the institutions that give our lives direction and purpose: our families, our schools, and our religious congregations. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every being -- (applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)My opponent's words on these issues are a little muddy, but his record is plenty clear. He says he supports the institution of marriage, but he voted against the Defense of Marriage Act. He voted against the ban on partial birth abortions.AUDIENCE: Boooo!THE PRESIDENT: One time on his campaign he called himself the candidate of conservative values, but he described the Reagan years as a period of moral darkness.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: There is a mainstream in American politics, and my opponent sits on the far left bank. (Applause.) He can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. The most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear: We'll protect the homeland; we'll strengthen our intelligence; we'll transform our all-volunteer army -- and keep it an all-volunteer army. (Applause.) We're staying on the offensive. We will strike the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.) We will continue to spread freedom and liberty, and we will prevail. (Applause.)Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was some three-and-a-half years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorists. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we acted, because the United States of America led, Afghanistan is free and is now an ally in the war on terror. (Applause.) Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; and an army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice. (Applause.)We are conducting a broad strategy to keep America safe. By defending ourselves, 50 million people in Afghanistan and Iraq are now free. Think about that. (Applause.) I want our youngsters here to recognize they're watching incredible history unfold. (Applause.) Take a look at Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago that many young girls were not allowed to go to school. That country was run by barbarians. They were backwards. They had an ideology based upon hatred. Their mothers would be pulled into the public square and whipped, some of them killed in a sports stadium because they wouldn't toe the line of their ideology. It was a dim and dark society. But because we acted in our self-interest, we freed the people of Afghanistan and they had presidential elections. Thousands of people came out to vote. (Applause.) The first voter in the presidential elections in Afghanistan was a 19-year-old woman. Think about that. (Applause.)Freedom is on the march, and the world is better for it. (Applause.) In Iraq, elections are scheduled for January. Think about how far that society has come, from the days of torture chambers and mass graves. See, it's in our interests, it's in our security interests that we stand with the people of Afghanistan and Iraq. Free societies in the Middle East will be hopeful societies, which no longer feed resentments and breed violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight the terrorists, instead of harboring them. And that will help us keep the peace. (Applause.)So the mission is clear. We will help these countries train armies and police and security forces, so the people of Afghanistan and Iraq can do the hard work of defending their freedom and democracy. We will help them get on the path to stability and self-government as quickly as possible, and then our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)I am proud to be the Commander-in-Chief of a great military. (Applause.) And it is a great military because of the character and the decency of those who wear our nation's uniform. (Applause.) I want to thank the veterans who are here tonight for having set such a good example for those who wear the uniform. (Applause.) I want to thank the military families who are here, for having made such great sacrifices for our freedom. (Applause.) We will continue to make sure that our military has all the resources they need to complete their missions. (Applause.)That is why -- that's why I went to the United States Congress and asked for $87 billion of supplemental funding to support our troops in combat in both Iraq and Afghanistan. (Applause.) It was a really important request, and it received great bipartisan support. As a matter of fact, only 12 United States Senators voted against the funding request, two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And when you're out there gathering up the vote, remind people of this fact: Only four members of the United States Senate, only four out of a hundred, voted to authorize the use of force and then voted against funding the troops sent into harm's way, two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: So they asked him, how could he have made that vote? And perhaps the most quote of the 2004 campaign -- (laughter) -- he said, I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it.AUDIENCE: -- before I voted against it! (Laughter and applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Now, he's given a lot of answers since then. One of the most interesting ones is when he said, well, the whole thing was just a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)We have a difference of opinion when it comes to making this country secure. And in one of our debates, Senator Kerry proposed that this nation should pass a global test before we send our troops.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: You know, the problem with his global test is that he could never pass it. (Laughter.) In 1990, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution supporting action to remove Saddam Hussein from Kuwait. The international community was united, countries throughout the world joined our coalition. Yet even after United Nations approval, in the United States Senate, Senator Kerry voted against the authorization of the use of force.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Think about that, and think about what he said in one of the debates, when he said it was a mistake to remove Saddam Hussein. He said he would have tried it differently -- he would have had another United Nations Security Council resolution. That's exactly what Saddam Hussein would have wanted. The truth of the matter is, Saddam would still be in power in Baghdad if Senator Kerry had his way, and he would have been in Kuwait.AUDIENCE: Yes!THE PRESIDENT: And the world would be worse off. The world is better off with Saddam sitting in a prison cell. (Applause.)Listen, I'll continue to build strong alliances during the next four years. Today when I was flying in from out West I had a good visit with Tony Blair, our strong ally. (Applause.) Alliances are important, coalitions are important. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: I believe in the transformational power of liberty. (Applause.) I'll tell you what I mean by that. I'll use an example. Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan is my friend. He's Laura's friend, as well. That probably doesn't seem unusual to some, but think about this -- it wasn't all that long ago, in the march of history, that we were at war with Japan. They were the sworn enemy of the United States of America. They attacked us. My dad fought against the Japanese. I'm confident people's relatives out here went to World War II against the Japanese. (Applause.)And after we won that war, President Harry S. Truman believed in the transformational power of liberty to convert an enemy into an ally. And so they worked to build a democracy in Japan. And there were a lot of skeptics in America then. You can imagine why -- Japan was the enemy. How could an enemy possibly become a democracy; why do we want to work with somebody who killed our sons; great skepticism.But fortunately, he believed in the power of liberty to transform. And as a result of that belief, I sit down at the table today with Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan, talking about the peace we all want, talking about how we can work together to confront the problems of the world so our children can live in a more peaceful world. We will succeed in Iraq, and someday an American President will sit down with a duly-elected leader of Iraq, and they'll be talking about the peace in the Middle East, and our children and our grandchildren will be better off for it. (Applause.)I believe that millions plead in silence for their freedom in the Middle East. I believe women want to live in a free society. (Applause.) I believe the moms in the Middle East want their children to grow up in a free world. (Applause.) I believe that if given a chance, the people of the Middle East will embrace the most honorable form of government ever devised by man -- democracy. (Applause.) I believe all these things because freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This is not one of those times. This is a time that requires firm resolve, clear vision and a deep faith that makes us a great nation. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I will never forget. There were workers in hard hats there, yelling at me at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes."" I remember trying to console a fellow. He looked me in the eye, and he said, ""Do not let me down."" Ever since that day I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)When I traveled your great state four years ago, I made a pledge that if I had a chance to serve, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, with your hard work, I will do so for four more years. (Applause.)God bless. Thank you all for coming. (Applause.) Thank you all. (Applause.)"
bush,2008,"I appreciate it, thank you. (Applause.) Thank you all for coming. (Applause.) I appreciate you all being here. With only 19 days to the election, the finish line is in sight. (Applause.) And Nevada will be a part of a great nationwide victory in November, the 2nd.  (Applause.)I'm proud to be on stage with so many of the governors, the nation's governors. I'm a member of the ex-governors club. (Applause.) They'll be a member of that club one day soon. (Laughter.) I know these folks really well -- they're hardworking, they bring people together to get the job done in their states. They focus on results, and that's what I've done as your President, and that's what I'll do for four more years. (Applause.)I want to thank our host, Governor Kenny Guinn, for his hospitality. (Applause.) It wasn't very hard to get the governors to come to Vegas -- (laughter) -- to begin a road trip. The next two days they're going to travel our country to tell people that leadership matters. (Applause.) They're going to tell the people that the best way to make sure America has strong and steady and principled leadership is to put Dick Cheney and me back into office. (Applause.)It's great to be in the home of the Running Rebels. (Applause.) And that's what I'm doing -- I'm running and I'm not going to stop until election day. (Applause.) Look, my only regret is that Laura is not here to see this crowd. (Applause.) She's right around the corner at the AARP convention. (Applause.) So the convention said, send your best speaker. (Laughter and applause.) When I married Laura, she said, fine, I'll marry you, so long as I never have to give a speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you got a deal. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that deal. (Applause.) When the people see her speak they see a compassionate, strong, great First Lady. (Applause.)I'm proud of my running mate, Dick Cheney. (Applause.) He did a really good job in his debate. (Applause.) I admit it, he doesn't have the -- he didn't have the waviest hair there on the set. (Laughter.) I didn't pick him because of his hairdo. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his experience, his judgment, his ability to get the job done for the American people. (Applause.)After this we're going to Reno, and then we're going up to Oregon, and I'm proud to be traveling with a great American in John McCain. (Applause.) I like traveling with John. We have a lot of fun. We laugh, we enjoy each other's company, and we share something in common: We both love our nation. (Applause.)I want to thank Senator John Ensign, the great Senator from Nevada, for being here today. (Applause.) And Congressman John Porter, make sure you put him back into office. (Applause.) Congressman Jim Gibbons, from the northern part of this state, is with us today, as well. Congressman, thanks for coming. (Applause.) I want to thank all the state and local officials who are here. I want to thank my friend, Lee Greenwood, for entertaining the folks. (Applause.)I particularly want to thank the grassroots activists who are here, the people who are going to put up the signs and make the phone calls. (Applause.) I'm here to thank you in advance for what you're going to do over the course of the next 19 days. (Applause.) You're going to tell people they have a duty in our democracy to vote. Get them headed to the polls. But don't overlook discerning Democrats, people like Zell Miller. (Applause.) And when you get them headed to the polls, tell them if they want a safer America, a stronger America and a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney back into office. (Applause.)We had a great debate last night. (Applause.) Those debates, all three debates clarified the differences in our records, our approaches and our plans for the future. I'm proud of my record. (Applause.) My opponent seemed to want to avoid talking about his. My record is one of lowering taxes, reforming education, providing prescription drugs to seniors, improving our homeland protection and waging an aggressive war against the terrorists. (Applause.)The Senator's record is 20 years of out-of-the-mainstream votes, without many significant reforms or results.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Our very different records are a window into what we believe and what we'll do in the next four years. The Senator believes in a bigger government; I believe in more freedom and choices for our citizens. (Applause.) The Senator believes government should dictate; I believe you should make the decisions. (Applause.)Sometimes it's a little hard to tell exactly what he believes -- (laughter) -- because he tries to obscure his votes. Take health care. Once again, last night, with a straight face -- (laughter) -- the Senator tried to say his health care plan is not a government plan. (Laughter.) Yet, 22 million new people will be enrolled in a government program under his plan, the largest expansion of government health care ever. Eighty percent of the newly-insured on his plan would be placed on a government program like Medicaid. The Senator claimed his plan would help small businesses -- yet, a study conducted by small business groups this week concluded Senator Kerry's plan is an over-priced albatross. (Applause.) I have a different view. I want to make health care more available and affordable by helping small businesses, not saddling them with a bunch of government rules. (Applause.)And once again, with a straight face, the Senator, shall we say, refined his answer on the proposed global test he would administer before acting to defend America.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: After trying to say it wasn't really a test at all, last night he once again defended his approach, saying, I think it makes sense. (Laughter.) The Senator now says we have to pass some international truth standard. Those are his words. The truth is, we should never turn over America's national security decisions to international bodies or leaders of other countries. (Applause.)In the last few years, the American people have gotten to know me. They know my blunt way of speaking. (Applause.) I get that from Mom. (Applause.) They know I sometimes mangle the English language. (Laughter.) I get that from Dad. (Laughter.) Americans also know that I tell you exactly what I'm going to do and I keep my word. (Applause.)When I came into office, the stock market had been in serious decline for six months. The American economy was sliding into a recession. To help families, and get this economy growing again, I pledged to reduce taxes. I kept my word, and the results are clear. (Applause.) The recession was one of the shallowest in American history. Over the last three years, our economy has grown at the fastest rate of any major industrialized nation. (Applause.) In the past 13 months, we've added 1.9 million new jobs. (Applause.) The unemployment rate in America is at 5.4 percent, lower than the average of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. (Applause.) The unemployment rate in Nevada is 4 percent. (Applause.) The mining sector is strong. Farm and ranch income is up. More people are owning their own home.We're moving forward, and there is much more to do. (Applause.) To make sure quality jobs are created in America and to make sure people can find work, America must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.) That means we need to reduce the regulations on our job creators. We must end junk lawsuits, which are threatening the small businesses which create most new jobs. (Applause.)To keep jobs here, Congress needs to pass my energy plan. My plan encourages conservation, encourages the use of renewables like ethanol and biodiesel. It encourages new technologies. It encourages clean coal technology. It increases domestic production. To keep jobs here, our nation must become less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)To protect jobs and communities in the West, we need to reduce the risk of devastating wildfires. That's why I was proud to sign the Healthy Forest Restoration Act. (Applause.) Under this good law, we are cleaning the underbrush that serves as fuel for fires. Because we acted, our forests are healthier, residents and small businesses are safer, and people across the West are better off. (Applause.)To create jobs, we need to reject economic isolationism and open up markets around the world for U.S. product. Americans can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere, so long as the rules are fair. (Applause.) To create jobs, we need to be wise about how we spend your money and keep your taxes low. (Applause.)My opponent has his own history on the economy.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: In 20 years as a Senator from Massachusetts, he's built up quite a record -- of a Senator from Massachusetts. (Laughter.) He's voted to raise taxes 98 times.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That is a vote for a tax increase about five times every year.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I think that qualifies as a pattern. (Laughter.) He can run from his record, but he cannot hide. (Applause.) Now he's promising not to raise taxes for anyone who earns less than $200,000 a year. The problem is, to keep that promise, he would have to break almost all of his other ones. (Laughter.) His plan to raise taxes in the top two income brackets would raise about $600 billion. But his spending promises will cost about four times that much, more than $2.2 trillion. That's with a ""T."" (Laughter.) That's a lot even for somebody from Massachusetts. (Laughter.) See, you can't have it both ways. To pay for all the big spending promises he made, he'll have to raise your taxes.AUDIENCE: Boooo!THE PRESIDENT: The choice in this election is clear. (Applause.) My opponent has a history of voting for higher taxes, and he promised to raise them in this campaign. And that's the kind of promise a Washington politician usually keeps. (Laughter.) I believe our families and our economy are better off when Americans keep more of what they earn. We will keep your taxes low. (Applause.)When I came into office, the public schools had been waiting for decades for hopeful reform. Too many of our children were shuffled through school without learning the basics. I pledged to restore accountability to the schools and end the soft bigotry of low expectations, and I kept my word. (Applause.) Seeing the results -- our children are making sustained gains in reading and math. We're closing the achievement gap for minority students. We're making progress for our families. We will leave no child behind. (Applause.)To build a more hopeful America, we must have the best-prepared and most highly-skilled work force in the world. Most new jobs are filled by people with at least two years of college education; yet only about one in four of our students gets there. So we'll fund early intervention programs in our high schools to help at-risk students. We'll place a new focus on math and science. Over time, we'll require a rigorous examination before graduation from high school. By raising performance in our high schools, and by expanding Pell grants for low- and middle-income families, we'll help more Americans start their career with a college diploma. (Applause.)My opponent has a history on education issues -- a history of doing almost nothing. (Laughter.) The Senator has pledged to weaken the No Child Left Behind Act.AUDIENCE: Boooo!THE PRESIDENT: He has proposed diluting the accountability standards and looking at measures like teacher attendance to judge whether students are learning.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: His proposals would undermine the high standards and accountability we worked hard to pass. We're moving beyond the old days of failure and mediocrity and low standards, and we're not going to go back. (Applause.)When I came to office, we had a problem in Medicare -- medicine was changing, but Medicare wasn't. For example, Medicare would pay tens of thousands of dollars for heart surgery, but wouldn't pay a dime for the prescription drugs that could prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. It didn't make any sense for our seniors, and it didn't make any sense for out taxpayers. I pledged to bring Republicans and Democrats together to strengthen and modernize Medicare for our seniors, and I kept my word. (Applause.) The results are clear. Seniors are already getting discounts on medicines, and beginning in 2006, all seniors will be able to get prescription drug coverage under Medicare. (Applause.)We're moving forward on health care, and there's much more to do. We need to make health care more affordable and more available for all our people. We need a safety net for those with the greatest needs. I believe in community health centers, places where the poor and the indigent can get care. In a new term, we'll make sure every poor county in America has a community health center. (Applause.)We need to do more to make sure more children are fully subscribed in our programs for low-income families. We must do more to make sure health care is affordable. You know, most of the uninsured are employees of small businesses. Small businesses have trouble affording health care. To help more workers get health care we should allow small businesses to join together, so they can buy insurance at the same discounts that big companies do. (Applause.)To make sure health care is affordable, we have got to expand health savings accounts, so workers in small businesses are able to pay lower premiums and people can save tax-free in a health care account they call their own. (Applause.) To make sure health care is available and affordable, we have got to do something about the junk lawsuits that are running up the costs of your health care. (Applause.) All the lawsuits force doctors to practice defensive medicine, which costs our government about $28 billion a year. They cost our nation's economy anywhere from $60 billion to $100 billion. The lawsuits drive up insurance premiums, which drive good doctors out of practice.Today I met Dr. James Barber. Three years ago Dr. Barber paid $27,000 in insurance premiums as an OB/GYN in Henderson. Last year's premiums would have been more than $100,000. He had to stop delivering babies in Nevada. He's now practicing in California, where they have reasonable medical liability laws. His premiums in California are $33,000, 70 percent of what they would cost in Nevada.I also met one of his former patients, Nicole Byrne. She said Dr. Barber saved her life during a previous pregnancy. Now she's pregnant again, and she is devastated that Dr. Barber won't be able to deliver her babies. Nicole and Dr. Barber understand that you cannot be pro-patient and pro-doctor and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put a trial lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice. I'm standing with the docs and patients. I am for medical liability reform now. (Applause.)The choice in this election is clear. My opponent wants to move in the direction of government-run health care. I believe health decisions ought to be made by doctors and patients, not by officials in Washington, D.C. (Applause.) I've set out policies that move America toward a positive and optimistic vision. I believe our country can, and must, be an ownership society. There's a saying that no one ever washes a rental car. (Laughter.) There's a lot of wisdom in that statement. (Laughter.) When you own something, you care about it, and you have a vital stake in the future of our country.So we're encouraging entrepreneurship, because every time a small business is started, someone is achieving the American Dream. (Applause.) We're encouraging health savings accounts, so people have the security of owning their own health care plan. We're promoting home ownership. More and more Americans own a home today. I love it when somebody opens the door of the place they live and says, welcome to my home; welcome to my piece of property. (Applause.)In a new term, I will take the next great step to build an ownership society by strengthening Social Security. (Applause.) Our Social Security system needs fixing. First, we'll make sure we keep the promise to those who are on Social Security today. I remember in the 2000 campaign, those ads saying, if George W. gets elected, they're going to take away your check. Our seniors got their checks. (Applause.) Nobody is going to take away our seniors' checks. (Applause.) Baby boomers like me are going to be just fine when it comes to Social Security. But our children and our grandchildren are understandably worried about whether Social Security will be around when they need it, and we need to be concerned about them.For their sake, we must strengthen Social Security by allowing younger workers to save some of their payroll taxes in a personal account that Washington politicians can never take away. (Applause.) My opponent wants to maintain the status quo when it comes to Social Security.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That is unacceptable. He's against Social Security -- these Social Security reforms. And he's just about against just about every other reform that gives more authority and control to individuals. On issue after issue, from Medicare without choices to schools with less accountability to higher taxes, he takes the side of more centralized control and more bureaucracy. There's a word for that attitude -- it's called liberalism. (Applause.) Now, he dismisses that as a label. Must have seen it differently when he said to a newspaper, I'm a liberal and proud of it. (Laughter.)Others have noticed. The nonpartisan National Journal Magazine did a study and named him the most liberal member of the United States Senate. And that's saying something. (Laughter.) Another group known as the Americans for Democratic Action have given Senator Kerry a higher lifetime liberal rating than Senator Ted Kennedy. And that's an accomplishment.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: See, I have a different record and a different philosophy. I don't believe in big government and I don't believe in indifferent government. I am a compassionate conservative; I believe in policies that empower people to improve their lives, not try to run their lives. (Applause.)In this time of change, some things do not change -- those are the values we try to live by, courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In changing times, we will support the institutions that give our lives direction and purpose -- our families, our schools, our religious congregations. We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every being counts. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)My opponent's words on these issues are a little muddy, but his record is plenty clear. (Laughter.) He says he supports the institution of marriage, but he voted against the Defense of Marriage Act, which a bipartisan Congress overwhelmingly passed, and my predecessor signed into law. He voted against the ban on the brutal practice of partial birth abortion.AUDIENCE: Boooo!THE PRESIDENT: He called himself the candidate of conservative values, but he has described the Reagan years as a time of moral darkness.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: There is a mainstream in American politics, and my opponent sits on the left bank. (Applause.) He can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. I believe the most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning, since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. (Applause.) Our strategy is clear. We will defend the homeland; we'll strengthen our intelligence services; we'll transform the all-volunteer army -- and we'll keep it an all-volunteer army. (Applause.) We will stay on the offensive. We will strike the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.) We will continue to spread freedom and liberty. And we will prevail. (Applause.)Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was three-and-a-half years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks.Because we acted, Afghanistan is a free nation, fighting terror. And last Saturday, the people of Afghanistan voted for a President. (Applause.) Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's leaders and associates have been brought to justice. (Applause.)We've got an aggressive strategy to keep us safe. And we'll stand with the people of a free Afghanistan and Iraq. Think about what happened in Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago that the Taliban ran that country. Young girls couldn't even go to school. They were not only harboring terrorists, they had this dark ideology of hate. And people showed up in droves to vote. Freedom is powerful. People have gone from darkness to light, because of liberty. (Applause.) The first voter in the Afghan presidential election was a 19-year-old woman. (Applause.)Iraq is headed toward elections. See, free societies in the Middle East will be hopeful societies, which no longer feed resentments and breed violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight the terrorists, instead of harboring them. And that helps us keep the peace. Our mission is clear: We'll help the countries train their armies and their police, so they can do the hard work of defending democracy. (Applause.) We'll help them get on the path to stability and democracy as quickly as possible, then our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)We have got a great United States military. (Applause.) I want to thank all the veterans who are here for having set such a great example for those who wear today's uniform. (Applause.) I want to thank the military families who are with us today for their sacrifices. (Applause.) And I want to assure the families, we'll keep the commitment I made to our troops -- we will make sure they have all the resources they need to complete their missions.And that's why I went to the United States Congress in September of 2003 and asked for an $87 billion supplemental request, money necessary to support those troops in Afghanistan and Iraq. We received great bipartisan support. As a matter of fact, only 12 United States senators voted against the supplemental request, the funding, two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: When you're out gathering the vote, remind your fellow citizens that only four United States senators voted to authorize the use of force and then against sending the money to support them in harm's way. Two of whom -- two of those four are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: You might remember my opponent's famous quote, when asked about that vote. He said, I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, he's given a lot of explanations since that one. One of the most interesting ones is when he finally said, well, the whole thing is a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. I believe that millions in the Middle East plead in silence for their freedom. I believe women want to grow up in a free society and raise their children in a free society. (Applause.) I believe that if given a chance, the people of the Middle East will embrace the most honorable form of government ever devised by man. I believe all these things because freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. You know, there are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. It's a time that requires firm resolve and clear vision, and a deep faith in the values that makes us a great nation.None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I will never forget. There were workers in hard hats yelling at me at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes."" (Applause.) Governor Pataki was with me. (Applause.) He knows -- he remembers those workers and those police and firefighters coming out of the rubble, bloodshot eyes. A guy grabbed me by the arm, and he said, ""Do not let me down."" Ever since that day, I wake up every morning trying to figure out how best to defend this country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago, when I traveled your state, asking for the vote, I made this pledge: If you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, I will do so for four more years. (Applause.)God bless. Thanks for coming. Thank you all. (Applause.)"
bush,2008,"Thank you all. (Applause.) Thanks for coming out. (Applause.) It's nice to be back in a part of the world that I know very well. (Applause.) I was raised right around the corner. (Applause.) It's good to be in a part of the world where the cowboy hats outnumber the ties. (Applause.) It's good to be in a part of the world where people believe in their family and their faith and their  country. (Applause.)I want to thank all the people from Lea County, New Mexico for coming here today. I'm proud you're here. Thanks for organizing this great event. (Applause.) I want to thank the people from Eddy County who are here. When I was a little guy, I distinctly remember going to Carlsbad Caverns. (Applause.) I went with the Cub Scout troop. It just so happens the den mother was my mother. (Laughter.) I think that's when her hair started to go white. (Laughter.)Appreciate the people from Chaves being here, as well. I want to thank my friends who've come over from the great state of Texas. I'm proud you all are here. (Applause.) I really appreciate the Flying Eagles from Hobbs being here. Thank you for being here in the band. (Applause.) Still play pretty good basketball? (Applause.) Yes. That's what I figured. (Laughter.)I'm here to ask for your vote. That's what I'm here to do. (Applause.) By the way, I don't know if you know this, but I'm the first sitting President to have ever visited Hobbs, New Mexico. (Applause.) I may just be the first sitting President to have visited, and the first person who's -- President who's ever been here before he was President. (Laughter.) All I can tell you is the other ones missed a lot by not coming to Hobbs, New Mexico. (Applause.)I'm also here to ask for your help. You know, last time, in New Mexico, we lost by just a little over 600 votes. If every one of you all -- if every one of you all takes somebody to the polls come voting time. We'll win. (Applause.) So I'm here to thank you for what you're going to do. You're going to convince our fellow citizens to do their duty and vote. And when you're turning people out to the polls, don't overlook discerning Democrats -- people like Zell Miller, who understands -- (applause) -- who understands that if you want a safer America, a stronger America, and a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney back in office. (Applause.)I'm keeping really good company today. (Applause.) I'm proud to be traveling with one of our twin daughters, Jenna Bush. (Applause.) This is the camping trip I promised to take her on when she was a kid. (Laughter.) Jenna and I just said goodbye to a great First Lady. You know, when I asked Laura to marry me, she said, fine, just so long as I never have to give a political speech. I said, you got a deal. (Laughter.) Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that. The American people have seen not only a great speaker, when she speaks, but they've seen a graceful, compassionate, great First Lady. (Applause.) I like to tell people, you know, I'm going to give you some reasons to put me back in, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)I'm real proud of George P. Bush. Now, his dad is my brother. And he's the governor of Florida. (Applause.) So if he's listening, turn out that vote. (Laughter.) I want to thank my Vice President. I'm proud to be running with Dick Cheney. He's a good, solid, strong American. (Applause.) I really am pleased to be working with a great United States Congressman from this part of the world. I'm proud of the job that Steve Pearce is doing. (Applause.) He brings that eastern New Mexico common sense to Washington, D.C. (Applause.) He's down to earth. He's smart. He's capable. He's doing you a great job in the House of Representatives. (Applause.)Laura and I are fond of Cynthia, his wife, and he kindly introduced me to his mother, Jane, today. I said to her, I said, is Steve still listening to you? She said, about half the time. (Laughter.) I said, well, that sounds like me and my mother. (Laughter.)With us today, as well, is a fellow running for Congress across the state line, named Randy Neugebauer. (Applause.) I know Randy. I trust his judgment. He's a good, honest man. He's a man that I can work with. It is important that the people of west Texas send Randy Neugebauer back to the United States Congress. (Applause.)I want to thank all the other state and local officials. I want to thank the members of my team who are here of Hispanic origin. The head of the SBA is here today, Hector Barreto; Rosario Marin, who's a former U.S. Treasurer; the White House Counsel, Alberto Gonzales is with us today. These folks are here to help us inspire the Hispanic vote to come our way. (Applause.) Con su apoyo, vamos a ganar. (Applause.)See, my message is for everybody. When I say a hopeful America, I'm just -- not talking about one segment of the country. I'm talking about every single person when it comes to a hopeful America.I want to thank my friend, Mark Wills. He's a good singer. (Applause.) Nice of him to be here today. I'm proud he's here. I particularly want to thank all the grassroots activists, the people involved with turning out the vote and making the phone calls. I know you've done a lot of hard work. First of all, it takes a lot of hard work to get this many people to show up. (Laughter.) If you put the same amount of work you put into getting this rally going to getting people to the polls, there's no doubt in my mind we'll carry New Mexico and win a great victory in November. (Applause.)We had a great debate on Friday night. (Applause.) As you can tell, I'm kind of working my way west for the final debate. Our debates have highlighted the clear differences between the Senator and me on issues ranging from jobs to taxes to health care and to the war on terror. Much as he tries to obscure it, on issue after issue he has shown why he earned the ranking as the most liberal member of the United States Senate. Several of his statements the other night simply don't pass the credibility test. With a straight face he said he'd had only one position on Iraq. (Laughter.) He must think we're on another planet. (Laughter.)In the spring of 2003, as I ordered the invasion of Iraq, Senator Kerry said it was the right decision. Now he says it's the wrong war. In the same debate he said Saddam was a threat; then a few minutes later he said there wasn't a threat in Iraq. And now he tries to tell us he's had only one position. Who's he trying to kid? (Laughter.) He can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)With another straight face, he tried to tell Americans that when it comes to his health care plan -- and I quote -- ""the government has nothing to do with it."" (Laughter.) The facts are that eight out of 10 people who get health care under Senator Kerry's plan would be placed on a government program. He can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)Then he was asked to look into the camera -- (laughter) -- and promise he would not raise taxes for anyone who earns less than $200,00 a year. The problem is, to keep that promise he'd have to break almost all his other promises. (Laughter.) His plan to raise taxes on the top two income brackets would raise about $600 billion, according to our counters, about $800 billion according to his planners -- counters. The problem is, is that his spending plans will cost almost four times as much, $2.2 trillion. You can't have it both ways. To pay for all the big spending programs he's outlined during his campaign, he's going to have to raise your taxes. See, he can run, but he cannot hide. (Applause.)You know, listening -- after listening to that litany of complaints and the dour pessimism, it took all I could do not to make a face. (Laughter.) I have a different view, a different philosophy, and a strong record to be running on. (Applause.) I worked hard to make this country a more hopeful place, and a more secure place. I've led our country with principle and resolve, and that's how I'll continue to lead this nation. (Applause.)The world in which we live and work is changing. Workers switch jobs more than they used to. Women are working in the home and outside the home, as well. That means they need new skills and benefits they can take with them from job to job. Yet many of the most fundamental systems of our government -- the tax code, the health care, pension plans and worker training -- were created for a world of yesterday, not tomorrow. I'm running for four more years to transform these systems to help citizens realize their dreams. (Applause.)And a plan -- any plan, any strategy for a hopeful America begins with a growing economy that creates good jobs. See, I believe in the energy and innovation and spirit of our workers, and our small business owners, and our farmers, and our ranchers. And that's why we unleashed that energy with the largest tax relief in a generation. (Applause.)When you're out rounding up the vote, you might remind people what we've been through, what this economy has been through. The stock market started to go down six months prior to my arrival in Washington, D.C. See, and that was -- that foretold the recession that came. So we had the stock market correction and a recession; we had some corporate scandals which affected our economy. By the way, we passed tough laws. We have made it abundantly clear that we will not tolerate dishonesty in the board rooms of America. (Applause.)And then the enemy hit us. And that cost our economy one million jobs in the three months after September the 11th. No, we've been through a lot, but we acted. Because we passed tax relief, this economy is growing. It's getting stronger, and we're not going to go back to the old days of tax and spend. (Applause.) The past 13 months, we've added 1.9 million new jobs. The national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent, which is lower than the average of the 1970s, 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.) State unemployment rate in New Mexico is 5.4 percent. People are working. People are finding a way to make a living. Our farmers are doing well. Our ranchers are doing well. The home ownership rate in America is at an all-time high. (Applause.)We're moving forward, and there's more to do. To make sure quality jobs are here, created here in America, America must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.) That means less regulations on the job creators. That means we got to do something about these frivolous lawsuits that are making it hard to expand the job base. (Applause.)Listen, to make sure this economy continues to grow, Congress needs to pass my energy plan. (Applause.) I put a plan up there that encourages conservation, that understands we can use renewables, like ethanol and biodiesel. It's a plan that also recognizes that we can explore for natural gas in environmentally friendly ways. It's a plan that recognizes we can use clean coal technology. At the heart of my plan is the understanding that in order to create jobs here, America must become less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.) And people around here know what I'm talking about. (Applause.)To create jobs, we need to keep people in businesses safe from wildfires. That's why I worked with Congress to pass the Healthy Forest Restoration Act. It's an important piece of legislation for much of your state. This good law allows us to thin out the underbrush that damages our forests and serves as kindling for fires. It's a common-sense measure that's protecting communities all across the west. I was proud to work on it, and I was proud to sign it into law. Both the Republican Senator from this state -- and by the way, Pete Domenici is a good one. He's a fine man. (Applause.) Both the Republican Senator and the Democrat Senator from New Mexico supported the Healthy Forest bill. But my opponent was against it. Now he says he likes part of the law. I guess it's not only the wildfires that shift in the wind. (Laughter and applause.)To create jobs, we got to reject economic isolationism and open up markets. Listen, we've opened up the markets for products from overseas, and it's good for you as consumers. See, here's the way the market works. If you've got more products to choose from, you're likely to get that which you want at a better price and a higher quality. That's how it works. So what I'm saying to places like China, you treat us the way we treat you. You open up your markets. And I'm saying that because I know we can compete with anybody, any time, anywhere so long as the rules are fair. (Applause.)To create jobs here and to make sure this economy grows, we got to keep your taxes low. Taxes are an issue in this campaign. We talked about them in the last debate and I hope we talk about them in the next debate. See, he's saying, oh, don't worry, I can pay for all my programs by taxing the rich. We've heard that before, haven't we? Yes, you know how it works. First of all, as I told you, he doesn't have enough money to pay for all his programs. There's a tax gap, and guess who usually gets stuck filling the hole -- yes, you do.Something else about taxing the rich -- the rich hire lawyers and accountants for a reason, to dodge the tax bill and stick you with it. We're not going to let him do it to you. We're going to win in November. (Applause.)To build a more hopeful America we've got to have the best prepared and most highly skilled work force in the world. It all starts with education. I believe every child can learn and every school must teach. I went to Washington, D.C. to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations, to challenge those systems that would just shuffle the kids through year after year, grade after grade, without teaching them the basics. See, we have a optimistic outlook. I learned it being out here where the sky is big. I believe every child can learn. I believe that. That's why we've raised the standards. That's why we believe in local control of schools. And that's why we measure, so we can solve problems early before it is too late.The achievement gap in America is closing. We're not going back to those old days of mediocrity in our schools. No dejaremos a ningn niZo atrs -- we will leave no child behind. (Applause.)Listen, most new jobs are filled by people with at least two years of college education, yet only one in four of our students gets there. That's why we've got to fund early intervention programs for at-risk students in high schools. That's why we got to emphasize math and science. That's why, over time, we'll require rigorous exam before graduation. By raising performance in our high schools and by expanding Pell grants for low- and middle-income families, we will help more Americans start their career with a college degree. (Applause.)I'm a big supporter of the community college system here in America. (Applause.) See, I believe that community colleges can be used wisely to make sure our workers gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. And to make sure our country is more hopeful, we need to make health care more affordable and more available. We need a safety net for those with the greatest needs. I believe every poor country in America ought to have a community health center, places where the poor and the indigent can get the health care they need. I believe we got to expand those community health centers. Since I've been President we've opened more than 600 -- expanded or opened more than 600. There's more to do. We got more to do to make sure our poor children are fully subscribed in programs for low-income families so they get the health care they need.There's more we can do to make sure health care is affordable. Most of the uninsured are employees of small businesses. In order to make sure families can get the insurance they need, we ought to allow small businesses to pool together, to pool risk across jurisdictional boundaries so they can buy insurance at the same discount that big companies can buy insurance. (Applause.)We'll make sure health savings accounts are available to all, so workers in small businesses are able to pay lower premiums, and people can save tax-free in a health care account they call their own. To make sure, health care is available and affordable, we got to do something about the junk lawsuits that are running good doctors out of practice and running up the costs of your health care. (Applause.) You can't be pro-doctor, pro-patient, pro-hospital, and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Laughter.) I think you have to choose. And my opponent made his choice, and he put a trial lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice: I am for medical liability reform now. (Applause.) No, there's a big difference in health care. We'll talk about it Wednesday night. But in all we do to improve health care, we will make sure that the decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by officials in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)I went to Washington to solve problems, not to pass them on. And I felt we had a problem when it came to making sure our seniors got good, modern medicine. Medicare is a vital program, yet it wasn't keeping pace with the changes in medicine. Let me give you an example. We'd pay thousands of dollars for heart surgery, but not one dime for the prescription drugs that could prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. That doesn't make any sense. It didn't make any sense for our seniors and it didn't make any sense for the taxpayers. So I worked with Republicans and Democrats to strengthen Medicare. In 2006, our seniors will be able to get prescription drugs in the Medicare program. Medicare is changing for the better. Our seniors will get a modern health care program, and we're not going to go back to the old days. (Applause.)Let me talk about the retirement systems for a second. In the 2000 campaign, I remember distinctly our seniors being told on television ads that if George W gets elected, you won't get your check. I don't know if they ran those kinds of ads here in New Mexico, or not. I bet they did -- yes. Well, the seniors got their checks. See, and that's the same kind of rhetoric you're going to hear again, because I'm going to talk about strengthening Social Security. But when I do so, I want you to remember that if you're getting your Social Security check, nothing is going to change. No matter what the political rhetoric is, you're going to continue to get your check, just like we said you would.If you're a baby boomer, we're in pretty good shape when it comes to Social Security. But when it -- but for our younger folks here in America, for our children and grandchildren, we need to think differently about whether or not the Social Security system is going to be viable for them. I believe younger workers ought to be able to take some of their own tax money and set up a personal savings account so they can get a better rate of interest on the money being accumulated for their retirement. (Applause.)In times of change, there are some things that don't change -- the values we try to live by: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In changing times, we will support the institutions that give our lives direction and purpose: our families, our schools, our religious congregations. We stand for a culture of life, in which every person matters and every being counts. We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) And we stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. I believe the most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. We've got a strategy that's clear. We're defending the homeland, we're transforming our military. I will make sure the all-volunteer army remains the all-volunteer army. (Applause.) We're reforming and strengthening our intelligence services. We're staying on the offensive. We are striking the terrorists abroad, so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda, Pakistan was a transit point for terrorists, Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorists fundraising, Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons, Iraq was a gathering threat, and al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. That's the way the world was.Because we acted, the government of a free Afghanistan held presidential elections last weekend and is an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been detained or killed. (Applause.) We have led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)After September the 11th, America had to assess every potential threat in a new light. It's one of the lessons of that fateful day. We confront an even greater danger, that the prospect of terrorists getting weapons of mass destruction would inflict great harm on America. We had to take a hard look at everyplace where terrorists might get those weapons. And one regime stood out: the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein. We knew his record of aggression and support for terror. We knew he hated America. We knew he had weapons of mass destruction. We know that after September the 11th, we must take threats seriously before they fully materialize. In Saddam we saw a threat.And I went to the United States Congress. They looked at the same intelligence I looked at, they remembered the same history I remembered, and they came to the same conclusion I came to, that Saddam Hussein was a threat, and they voted to authorize the use of force. My opponent -- my opponent looked at the same intelligence and he voted to authorize the use of force.Before the United States ever commits troops into harm's way, we must try all means to deal with the threat. No President ever wants to send America's sons and daughters to war. So I worked to avoid that. And I went to the United Nations in the hopes that diplomacy would work. The United Nations had a debate. They looked at the same intelligence we were looking at. They passed another resolution telling Saddam Hussein to disclose, disarm or face serious consequences. I believe that when an international body speaks, it must mean what it says. (Applause.)So we gave Saddam Hussein a final chance, and he continued to deceive the world. He was deceiving the weapons inspectors. And so I have a choice to make at this time in our history: Do I forget the lessons of September the 11th and take the word of a madman, or do I take action to defend our country? Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)We didn't find the stockpiles that we all thought were there. But as the Duelfer report says, Saddam Hussein retained the intent and the capability to rebuild his weapons programs. He was gaming the oil-for-food program, using it to influence officials in other countries. Why? Because he wanted the world to look the other way, so he could restart his programs.The world is safer with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. (Applause.) Knowing what I know today, I would have made the same decision. (Applause.) Because we acted in Afghanistan and Iraq, America is safer, and 50 million people now live in freedom. (Applause.)Think about what took place in Afghanistan this past weekend. It's an unbelievable story. Just three-and-a-half years ago, people lived under the brutal dictatorship of the Taliban. These were people that wouldn't let many young girls go to school, and when women didn't agree with them they took them in the public square and whipped them, and sometimes killed them in the sports stadium. These were brutal people. And because they're gone, Afghanistan held presidential elections. The first voter was a 19-year-old women who was able to express her opinion in the polls. (Applause.)And Iraq has got a strong Prime Minister and a national council, and national elections are scheduled for January. Think about how far that country has come from the days of torture chambers and mass graves. No, we're standing with the people of Afghanistan and Iraq, because when America gives its word, America must keep its word. (Applause.)We're also standing with them because a free Afghanistan and Iraq will make our country safer. See, free societies in the Middle East will be hopeful societies, which no longer feed resentments and breed violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight the terrorists instead of harboring them. And that helps us keep the peace.Our mission is clear: We will help those countries train armies so that the people of Afghanistan and Iraq can do the hard work of defending democracy. We'll help them get on the path to stability and self-govern as soon as possible, and then our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)We've got a great United States military. (Applause.) And I want to thank the veterans who are here today for having such -- set such a great example to those who wear the uniform. (Applause.) And I want to thank the military families who are here today. (Applause.) I've made a commitment to those who wear the uniform and to their families, they'll have all the resources they need to do their job. That's why I went to the United States Congress in September of 2003 and asked for $87 billion in supplemental funding to support our troops in harm's way in Afghanistan and Iraq. And this was essential funding. This was really important funding. We received great bipartisan support for that funding. As a matter of fact, the support was so strong that only 12 United States senators voted against it. Now, when you're out there rounding up the vote, remind people there were only four United States senators who voted to authorize the use of force and then voted against money necessary to support our troops in harm's way -- and two of those are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Boooo!THE PRESIDENT: You might remember my opponent's famous quote: ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it."" (Laughter.) Now, I know something about eastern New Mexico and west Texas, and there are not many folks who talk like that in this part of the world. (Laughter.) They kept pressing him, you know. He's giving a lot of explanations for that vote. There are just too many to enumerate. (Laughter.) One of my favorites is when he said, well, it's just a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)Now, on national security, my opponent has a record. He can run, but he can't hide from it. (Laughter.) He voted against the weapons systems that helped our country win the Cold War. He voted to cut America's intelligence budget by $7.5 billion after 1993 -- that's after the World Trade Center got bombed for the first time. He now says he wants a global test before taking to defend America's security.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That's what he said. I'm not putting words in his mouth either. (Laughter.) The problem is the Senator can never pass his own test. (Laughter.) Think about that -- in 1990, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution supporting action to remove Saddam Hussein from Kuwait. The international community was united. Countries throughout the world joined our coalition. Yet in the United States Senate after the Security Council resolution, Senator Kerry voted no on the authorization of force.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: See, if driving Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait with the support of the international community does not meet this test, then nothing will meet his test. And that's dangerous in the kind of world we live in. See, we have a different view of the world, a different view of America's role in confronting threats. Just this weekend, we saw new evidence that Senator Kerry fundamentally misunderstands the war on terror. Earlier he questioned whether it was really a war at all, describing it as primarily a law enforcement and intelligence-gathering operation, instead of a threat that demands the full use of American power.Now, just this weekend, Senator Kerry talked of reducing terrorism to -- quote -- ""nuisance"" -- end quote -- and compared it to prostitution and illegal gambling. See, I couldn't disagree more. Our goal is not to reduce terror to some acceptable level of nuisance. Our goal is to defeat terror by staying on the offensive, destroying terrorists, and spreading freedom and liberty around the world. (Applause.)I'll always work with our friends and allies. Alliances are important, and within the next four years, we'll continue to build strong coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. I tell people about my relationship with Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan. I tell them that because it's an interesting lesson. You see, it wasn't all that long ago that we were fighting the Japanese. If you're 58 years old, it seems like an eternity, since it was 60 years ago. (Laughter.) But my dad was in the war; I guarantee you there are people here in the audience who were touched by that war and had a granddad or a dad fight in that war.And after we won, Harry S. Truman, President of the United States, believed in the power of liberty to transform societies. And he worked with the Japanese to help them develop a democracy. A lot of people questioned that. There was a lot of pessimism after World War II. You can understand why. The Japanese were the enemy. Why do we care after we won? We had defeated them. A lot of people here's lives had been turned upside-down because a loved-one's life had been lost, and they didn't have -- want to have anything to do with the enemy. But fortunately, there were people in this country who had the faith in the ability of liberty to transform societies.And so now I sit down at the table with Prime Minister Koizumitalking about the peace, talking about how to achieve the peace we want for our children and grandchildren. I believe the same lessons apply for today. We will achieve a free Iraq. Iraq will be a democracy. And when we do so, at some point in time, an American President and a duly-elected leader of Iraq will be sitting down talking about how to keep the peace. And our children and grandchildren will be able to live in a better world. (Applause.)I believe that millions in the Middle East plead in silence for their freedom. I believe women want there to be a free society in the Middle East. I know they want their children to be able to grow up in a world in which they can realize their dreams. I believe that, if given a chance, the people of the Middle East will embrace the most honorable form of government ever devised by man. I believe all these things because freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. This is a time that requires firm resolve, clear vision and a deep faith in the values that makes us a great nation.None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day that is indelibly etched in my memory. I will never forget it. There were workers in hard hats yelling at me at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes."" (Applause.) I remember a man grabbing me by the arm, and looked me in the eyes, and he said, ""Do not let me down."" Ever since that day, I have awakened, working as hard as I possibly can to protect this country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago, when I traveled your great state, I said if you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, with your hard work, I will do so for four more years. (Applause.)Thanks for coming. God bless. God bless you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all. (Applause.) Thank you all very much. (Applause.) Thank you all for coming. Please be seated. (Applause.) Thank you all. Thanks for such a great welcome. I appreciate it. It's great to be in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania. It's such an honor to be back here. I'm glad to be in a part of the world where people work hard, they love their families -- (applause) -- good to be in a part of the world where people like to hunt and fish. (Applause.)  My regret is that Laura is not with me. She is --AUDIENCE: Awww --THE PRESIDENT: I know it. (Laughter.) That's generally the reaction. (Laughter.) Kind of like, why didn't you stay home and send Laura. (Laughter.) You're not going to believe this, it's a true story -- or kind of true. (Laughter.) I said, will you marry me? She said, fine, just so long as I never have to give a speech. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you got a deal. (Laughter.) Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that promise. Laura -- when Laura speaks, people see a compassionate, decent, strong First Lady. (Applause.)I had my morning briefing today with someone you're familiar with -- that would be your former governor, Tom Ridge. (Applause.) So Laura sends her best, as does Tom Ridge.Today I traveled with Don Sherwood. (Applause.) As we say in Crawford, he's a good one. He's a great member of the United States House of Representatives. I'm proud to work with him. He cares deeply about the people of this important part of the state of Pennsylvania. He is a -- he is a fine representative who brings integrity to the office. I appreciate your service. (Applause.)I want to thank all the state and local officials who are here. I want to thank the candidates who are here. I want to thank the grassroots activists who are here. (Applause.) I want to thank you for what you're going to do, which is to put up the signs, make the phone calls, turn out the vote. With your help, there's no doubt in my mind we'll carry Pennsylvania. (Applause.)I am sure many of you stayed up to watch the vice presidential debate last night. (Applause.) America saw two very different visions of our country, and two different hairdos. (Laughter.) I didn't pick my Vice President for his hairdo. I picked him for his judgment, his experience -- (applause.) A great Vice President. I'm proud to be running with him. (Applause.)In less than a month you'll have a chance to vote for Dick Cheney and me. Think about that -- less than a month. I'm looking forward to coming down the stretch with a positive, strong message. As your President I've worked to make America a more hopeful and more secure place. I've led our country with principle and resolve. And that's how I'll lead our nation for four more years. (Applause.)When I took -- when I took office in 2001, the bubble of the '90s had burst. Our economy was headed into a recession. And because of the attacks of September the 11th, nearly a million jobs were lost in three months. It was a dangerous time for our economy. People were warning of potential deflation and depression. But I acted. To stimulate the economy, I called on Congress to pass historic tax relief, which it did, without my opponent's ""yes"" vote. (Applause.) The tax relief was the fuel that got our economy growing again. Thanks to the efforts of our citizens, and the right policies in the right place at the right time, we put the recession behind us and America is creating jobs once again. (Applause.)We have built a broad and solid record of accomplishment. In the past year, the United States of America has added about 1.7 million new jobs. (Applause.) More than Germany, Japan, Great Britain, Canada and France combined. (Applause.) Real tax -- real after-tax income -- that's the money in your pocket to spend on groceries or house payments and rent -- is up more than 10 percent since I took office. (Applause.) Home ownership is at an all-time high in America. (Applause.) Farm income is up. Small businesses are flourishing. The entrepreneurial spirit is strong in the United States of America. (Applause.)Ours is a record of accomplishment. Thanks to reforms in education, math and reading scores are increasing in our public schools. (Applause.) Ten million students will get record levels of grants and loans to help with college. (Applause.) Low-income seniors -- low-income seniors are getting $600 extra to help pay for medicine this year in their drug discount cards. And soon Medicare will offer prescription drug coverage to every senior in America. (Applause.) We have made America a stronger, more hopeful country -- and we're just getting started. (Applause.)Listen, I -- I like to travel our country because I have a chance to talk to our fellow citizens. I understand the challenges facing our nation. People are living and working in a time of change. Workers switch jobs more than they used to, which means they often need new skills and benefits they can take with them from job to job. We're in a changing world, yet the systems of government haven't changed. I'm running for four more years to change the systems of government so people can better realize the great dreams of America. (Applause.)Making sure people realize those dreams, it's essential that our education systems work. We're going to raise the standards and expectations in every high school. We'll invest in our nation's fine community colleges so workers can be prepared to fill the jobs of the 21st century. We're going to expand health savings accounts so people can pay health expenses with tax-free money and keep the savings if they change jobs. We're going to improve Social Security, to allow younger workers to own a piece of their own retirement, a nest egg that the Washington politicians can never take away. (Applause.)To keep this economy strong and competitive, we must make sure America is the best place in the world to start a business and to do business. (Applause.) To make sure America is the best place in the world to start a business, our taxes must be low; Congress must make the tax relief we passed permanent. (Applause.) To keep jobs here, there need to be less regulations on our small businesses. (Applause.) To keep jobs here, we must pass an energy plan that makes us less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.) To make sure jobs exist here in America, we got to do something about these junk and frivolous lawsuits. (Applause.) Trial lawyers shouldn't be getting rich at the expense of our entrepreneurs and our doctors. (Applause.)My opponent and I have a very different view on how to grow our economy. Let me start with taxes. I have a record of reducing them; he has a record of raising them.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He voted in the United States Senate to increase taxes 98 times.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That's a lot. (Laughter.) He voted for higher taxes on Social Security benefits.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: In 1997, he voted for the formula that helped cause the increase in Medicare premiums.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: My opponent was against all of our middle class tax relief. He voted instead to squeeze another $2,000 per year from the average middle class family. Now the Senator is proposing higher taxes on more than 900,000 small business owners. My opponent is one of the few candidates in history to campaign on a pledge to raise taxes. (Laughter.) And that's the kind of promise a politician from Massachusetts usually keeps. (Laughter and applause.)He says the tax increase is only for the rich. You've heard that kind of rhetoric before. The rich hire lawyers and accountants for a reason -- to stick you with the tab. The Senator is not going to tax you because we're going to win in November. (Applause.)The Senator and I have different views on another threat to our economy -- frivolous lawsuits. He's been a part of the Washington crowd that has obstructed legal reform again and again. Meanwhile, all across America unfair lawsuits are hurting small businesses. Lawsuits are driving up health care costs. Lawsuits are threatening OB/GYNs all across our country. Lawsuits are driving good doctors out of practice. (Applause.) We need a President who will stand up to the trial lawyers in Washington, not put one on the ticket. (Applause.)The Senator and I have very different views on health care. I've got a specific plan to help Americans find health care that's available and affordable, lawsuit reform, association health care plans to help our small businesses, health savings accounts, community health centers to help the poor, expanding health care for low-income children, using technology to drive down the cost of health care.He has a different vision. Under his health plan, 8 million Americans would lose the private insurance they get at work, and most would end up on a government program. Under his plan, 8 out of 10 people who get new insurance will get it from the federal government. My opponent's proposal would be the largest expansion of government-run health care ever. And when government pays the bills, government makes the rules. His plan would put bureaucrats in charge of dictating coverage, which could ration care and limit your choice of doctor. Senator Kerry's proposal would put us on the path to ""Clinton-care.""AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I'll make sure doctors and patients are in charge of the decisions in America's health care. (Applause.)The Senator and I have different views on government spending. Over the years, he's voted 274 times to break the federal budget limits. And in this campaign, Senator Kerry has announced more than $2 trillion in new spending. And that's a lot of money even for a senator from Massachusetts. (Laughter and applause.) During his 20 years as a senator, my opponent hasn't had many accomplishments. Of the hundreds of bills he submitted, only five became law. One of them was ceremonial. But to be fair, he's earned a special distinction in Congress. The nonpartisan National Journal analyzed his record and named John Kerry the most liberal member of the United States Senate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And when the competition includes Ted Kennedy, that's really saying something. (Laughter and applause.) I'm telling you, I know that bunch. (Laughter.) It wasn't easy for my opponent to become the single most liberal member of the Senate. You might even say, it was hard work. (Laughter and applause.) But he earned that title -- by voting for higher taxes, more regulation, more junk lawsuits, and more government control over your life.And that sets up a real difference in this campaign. My opponent is a tax-and-spend liberal; I'm a compassionate conservative. (Applause.) My opponent -- my opponent wants to empower government; I want to use government to empower people. (Applause.) My opponent seems to think all the wisdom is found in Washington, D.C.; I trust the wisdom of the American people. (Applause.)Our differences are also clear on issues of national security. When I took office in 2001, threats to America had been gathering for years. Then on one terrible morning, the terrorists took more lives than America lost at Pearl Harbor. Since that day, we have waged a global campaign to protect the American people and bring our enemies to account. Our government has trained over a half a million first responders. We tripled spending on homeland security. Law enforcement and intelligence have better tools to stop terrorists, thanks to the Patriot Act, which Senator Kerry voted for, but now wants to weaken. The Taliban regime that sheltered al Qaeda is gone from power and the people of Afghanistan will vote in free elections this very week. (Applause.)A black market network that provided weapons materials to North Korea and Libya and Iran is now out of business. (Applause.) Libya, itself, has given up its weapons of mass destruction programs. (Applause.) We convinced Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to join the fight against the terrorists. And more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice. (Applause.)After September the 11th, America had to assess every potential threat in a new light. Our nation awakened to an even greater danger, the prospect that terrorists who killed thousands with hijacked airplanes would kill many more with weapons of mass murder. We had to take a hard look at everyplace where terrorists might get those weapons. And one regime stood out: the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein.We knew the dictator had a history of using weapons of mass destruction, a long record of aggression and hatred for America. He was listed by Republican and Democrat administrations as a state sponsor of terrorists. There was a risk -- a real risk -- that Saddam Hussein would pass weapons, or materials, or information to terrorist networks. In the world after September the 11th, that was a risk we could not afford to take. (Applause.)After 12 years of United Nations Security Council resolutions, we gave him a final chance to come clean and listen to the demands of the free world. When he chose defiance and war, our coalition enforced the just demands of the world. And the world is better off with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. (Applause.)We've had many victories in the war on terror, and that war goes on. Our nation is safer, but not yet safe. To win this war, we must fight on every front. We'll stay on the offensive against terrorist networks, striking them before they come to America to hurt us. We'll confront governments that support terrorists and could arm them, because they're equally guilty of terrorist murder. (Applause.) And our long-term victory requires confronting the ideology of hate with freedom and hope. (Applause.)Our victory requires changing the conditions that produce radicalism and suicide bombers, and finding new democratic allies in a troubled part of the region. America is always more secure when freedom is on the march. And freedom is on the march -- in Afghanistan and Iraq and elsewhere. (Applause.) There will be good days and there will be bad days in the war on terror, but every day we will show our resolve and we will do our duty. This nation is determined: we will stay in the fight until the fight is won. (Applause.)My opponent agrees with all this -- except when he doesn't. (Laughter.) Last week in our debate, he once again came down firmly on every side of the Iraq war. (Laughter.) He stated that Saddam Hussein was a threat and that America had no business removing that threat. Senator Kerry said our soldiers and Marines are not fighting for a mistake -- but also called the liberation of Iraq a ""colossal error."" He said we need to do more to train Iraqis, but he also said we shouldn't be spending so much money over there. He said he wants to hold a summit meeting, so he can invite other countries to join what he calls ""the wrong war in the wrong place at the wrong time."" (Laughter and applause.)He said terrorists are pouring across the Iraqi border, but also said that fighting those terrorists is a diversion from the war on terror. (Laughter.) You hear all that and you can understand why somebody would make a face. (Laughter and applause.)My opponent's endless back-and-forth on Iraq is part of a larger misunderstanding. In the war on terror, Senator Kerry is proposing policies and doctrines that would weaken America and make the world more dangerous. His -- Senator Kerry approaches the world with a September the 10th mind-set. He declared in his convention speech that ""any attack will be met with a swift and certain response."" That was the mind-set of the 1990s, while al Qaeda was planning the attacks on America. After September the 11th, our object in the war on terror is not to wait for the next attack and respond, but to prevent attacks by taking the fight to the enemy. (Applause.)In our debate, Senator Kerry said that removing Saddam Hussein was a mistake because the threat was not imminent. The problem with this approach is obvious: if America waits until a threat is at our doorstep, it might be too late to save lives. (Applause.) Tyrants and terrorists will not give us polite notice before they launch an attack on our country. (Applause.) I refuse to stand by while dangers gather. In the world after September the 11th, the path to safety is the path of action. And I will continue to defend the people of the United States of America. (Applause.) Thank you all. Thank you all.My opponent has also announced the Kerry doctrine, declaring that American actions in the war on terror must pass a ""global test.""AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Under this test, America would not be able to act quickly against threats, because we'd be sitting around waiting for our grade from other nations and other leaders. (Laughter.)I have a different view: America will always work with allies for security and peace. But the President's job is not to pass a global test; the President's job is to protect the American people. (Applause.) Thank you all.When my opponent first ran for Congress, he argued that American troops should be deployed only at the directive of the United Nations.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, he's changed his mind. (Laughter.) No, he has, in all fairness. But it is a window into his thinking. Over the years, Senator Kerry has looked for every excuse to constrain America's action in the world. These days he praises America's broad coalition in the Persian Gulf War. But in 1991, he criticized those coalition members as ""shadow battlefield allies who barely carry a burden."" Sounds familiar. At that time, he voted against the war. If that coalition didn't pass his global test, clearly, nothing will. (Laughter and applause.) This mind-set would paralyze America in a dangerous world. I'll never hand over America's security decisions to foreign leaders and international bodies that do not have America's interests at heart. (Applause.)My opponent's doctrine has other consequences, especially for our men and women in uniform. My opponent supports the International Criminal Court, which would allow unaccountable foreign prosecutors and judges to put American soldiers on trial.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That would be a legal nightmare for our troops. My fellow citizens, as long as I'm your President, Americans in uniform will answer to the officers and laws of the United States -- not to the International Criminal Court in The Hague.AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: The Senator speaks often about his plan to strengthen America's alliances, but he's got an odd way of doing it. In the middle of the war, he's chosen to insult America's fighting allies by calling them, ""window dressing,"" and the ""coalition of the coerced and the bribed."" The Italians who died in Nasiriyah were not window dressing. They were heroes in the war on terror. (Applause.) The British and the Poles at the head of the multinational divisions in Iraq were not coerced or bribed. They have fought, and some have died, in the cause of freedom. These good allies and dozens of others deserve the respect of all Americans, not the scorn of a politician. (Applause.)Instead, the Senator would have America bend over backwards to satisfy a handful of governments with agendas different from our own. This is my opponent's alliance-building strategy: brush off your best friends, fawn over your critics. And that is no way to gain the respect of the world. (Applause.)My opponent says he has a plan for Iraq. Parts of it should sound pretty familiar -- it's already known as the Bush plan. (Laughter and applause.) Senator Kerry suggests we train Iraqi troops, which we've been doing for months. Just this week, Iraqi forces backed by coalition troops fought bravely to take the city of Samarra from the terrorists and Baathists and insurgents. (Applause.) Senator Kerry -- Senator Kerry is proposing that we have -- that Iraq have elections. (Laughter.) Those elections are already scheduled for January. (Laughter and applause.) He wants the U.N. to be involved in those elections. Well, the U.N. is already there.There was one element of the Senator -- there's one element of Senator Kerry's plan that's a new element. He's talked about artificial timetables to pull our troops out of Iraq. He sent the signal that America's overriding goal in Iraq would be to leave, even if the job isn't done. That may satisfy his political needs, but it complicates the essential work we're doing in Iraq. (Applause.) The Iraqi people -- the Iraqi people need to know that America will not cut and run when their freedom is at stake. (Applause.) Our soldiers and Marines need to know that America will honor their service and sacrifice by completing the mission. (Applause.) And our enemies in Iraq need to know that they can never out-last the will of America. (Applause.)Senator Kerry assures us that he's the one to win a war he calls a mistake, an error, and a diversion. But you can't win a war you don't believe in fighting. (Applause.) In Iraq, Senator Kerry has a strategy of retreat; I have a strategy of victory. (Applause.) We've returned sovereignty to the Iraqi people ahead of schedule. We've trained about 100,000 Iraqi soldiers, police officers and other security personnel, and that total will rise to 125,000 by year-end. We've already allocated more than $7 billion for reconstruction efforts, so more Iraqis can see the benefits of freedom. We're working with a coalition of some 30 nations to provide security. Other nations are helping with debt relief and reconstruction aid for Iraqis. And although the terrorists will try to stop them, Iraq will hold free elections in January, because the Iraqi people want and deserve to govern themselves. (Applause.)I understand some Americans have strong concerns about our role in Iraq. I respect the fact that they take this issue seriously, because it is a serious matter. I assure them we're in Iraq because I deeply believe it is necessary and right and critical to the outcome of the war on terror. If another terror regime were allowed to emerge in Iraq, the terrorists would find a home, a source of funding, vital support. They would correctly conclude that free nations do not have the will to defend themselves. If Iraq becomes a free society at the heart of the Middle East, an ally in the war on terror, a model of hopeful reform in a region that needs hopeful reform, the terrorists will suffer a crushing defeat, and every free nation will be more secure. (Applause.)This is why Democratic Senator Joe Lieberman calls Iraq a ""crucial battle in the global war on terrorism."" This is why Prime Minister Tony Blair has called the struggle in Iraq ""the crucible in which the future of global terrorism will be determined."" This is why the terrorists are fighting with desperate cruelty. They know their own future is at stake. Iraq is no diversion; it is the place where civilization is taking a decisive stand against chaos and terror -- and we must not waver. (Applause.)Unfortunately, my opponent has been known to waver. (Laughter.) His well-chosen words and rationalizations cannot explain why he voted to authorize force against Saddam Hussein, and then voted against money for bullets, and vehicles and body armor for the troops on the ground. He tried to clear it all up by saying, I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it. Now he says he ""made a mistake"" in how he talked about the war. The mistake here is not what Senator Kerry said; the mistake is what he did in voting against funding for Americans in combat. (Applause.) That is the kind of wavering a nation at war can never afford.As a candidate, my opponent promises to defend America. The problem is as a senator for two decades, he has built a record of weakness. The record shows he twice led efforts to gut our intelligence service budgets. The record shows he voted against many of the weapons that won the Cold War, and are vital to current military operations. And the record shows he has voted more than 50 times against missile defense systems that would help protect us from the threats of a dangerous world.I have a record in office, as well. And all Americans have seen that record. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I will never forget. There were workers in hard hats yelling at me, ""Whatever it takes."" I remember trying to console people coming out of that rubble, and a guy grabbed me by the arm, and he looked me in the eye and said, ""Do not let me down."" These men and women -- (applause) -- the men and women there took it personally. You took it personally. I took it personally. I have a responsibility that goes on. I wake up every morning thinking about how to make our country more secure. I have acted again and again to protect our people. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Twenty-seven -- 27 days from today, Americans will make a critical choice. My opponent offers an agenda that is stuck in the thinking and the policies of the past. On national security, he offers the defensive mind-set of September the 10th, a global test to replace American leadership, a strategy of retreat in Iraq, and a 20-year history of weakness in the United States Senate. Here at home, he offers a record and an agenda of more taxes and more spending, and more litigation, and more government control over your life.The race for President is a contest for the future, and you know where I stand. I'm running for President to keep this nation on the offensive against terrorists, with the goal of total victory. I'm running -- (applause) -- I'm running for President to keep this economy moving so every worker has a good job and quality health care and a secure retirement. (Applause.) I'm running for President to make our nation a more compassionate society, where no one is left out, where every life matters.I have a hopeful vision. I believe this young century will be liberty's century. We'll promote liberty abroad, protect our country and build a better world beyond the war on terror. We'll encourage liberty at home to spread the prosperity and opportunity of America to every corner of our country. I will carry this message to my fellow citizens in the closing days of this campaign, and with your help, we will win a great victory on November the 2nd. God bless. God bless our great country. (Applause.)Thank you all. Thanks for coming. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all for coming.AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Thank you all. The sun is shining on Ohio. (Applause.) I'm thrilled to be here. I am the first sitting President ever to come to this fine city. (Applause.) The rest of them missed a great place. (Applause.)I'm so proud you all came out today. I'm so honored to be standing up here with Chuck Canterbury to receive the endorsement of the Fraternal Order of the Police. It means a lot to get the endorsement from those who serve our country on a daily basis to make it safe. (Applause.)I'm proud of that endorsement. I want to thank Jim Pasco and Nick DiMarco, as well as all the Fraternal Order of Police folks standing behind me.I want to thank you all for coming. I'm here to ask for your vote. (Applause.) We're getting closer and closer to election day, and I'm here to ask for your help, as well. (Applause.) Go out and register your friends and your neighbors. Tell them they have a duty in America to vote. In a free society, we have an obligation to go to the polls. Make sure you don't overlook those discerning Democrats, either. (Laughter.) Like Zell Miller. (Applause.) Or my friend, the mayor of Youngstown, Ohio, George McKelvey. (Applause.) I'm proud you're here, Mr. Mayor. I'm proud to call you ""friend"" and I'm proud to call you ""supporter."" Thanks for coming. (Applause.)Then after you get them registered to vote, get them headed to the polls. And remind them that if they want a safer America, a stronger America, and a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney back in office. (Applause.)Listen, I have one regret, and that is that Laura isn't here with me.AUDIENCE: Awww!THE PRESIDENT: Yes, I know, I hear it all the time -- why didn't you send Laura, and you stay at home? (Laughter.) True story. She said, fine, I'll marry you, when I asked her, but she said, I don't ever want to have to give a speech. (Laughter.) I said, you got a deal. (Laughter.) Fortunately, she didn't hold me to my word. The country got to see Laura speaking in New York City at that convention. They got to see a strong, decent, fine woman. Laura is a great First Lady. (Applause.) I'm really proud of her. I'm going to give you some reasons to put me back in, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)And I'm proud of my Vice President, Dick Cheney. (Applause.) He's warming up. (Laughter.) He'll be right around the corner pretty soon. He's not going to have the waviest hair on the set. (Laughter.) I didn't pick him for his hair. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his judgment and his sound experience. Dick Cheney is getting the job done for the American people. (Applause.)I'm proud of your United States Senator Mike DeWine. Thanks for coming, Mike. (Applause.) I'm honored you're here. Speaking about senators, you've got another good one in George Voinovich. You need to put him back in. He's doing Ohio good work. He's a good, solid man, a good, decent fellow.I want to thank Congressman Ralph Regula for being with us today, too. Thank you, Chairman. I'm glad you're here. Lieutenant Governor Jennette Bradley is with us. Today is her birthday. Yes. What a great way to celebrate your birthday. (Laughter.)I want to thank the Mayor, Don Robart, who is here. Mr. Mayor, my only advice, my only advice -- I know you didn't ask for any -- but my only advice is, fill the potholes. (Laughter and applause.)I want to thank the high school band that's here. Appreciate you coming. (Applause.) But most of all, thank you all. I want to thank those who work at the grassroots level for putting up the signs and making the phone calls. (Applause.) I appreciate you. I want to thank you for what you have done and what you're going to do coming down the stretch. With your help, there is no doubt in my mind we will carry Ohio again and win a great victory in November. (Applause.)And I'm looking forward to this campaign. I love coming to your state -- I've been spending some quality time here. (Laughter.) I like to come because I want to tell people where I stand, what I believe, and where I'm going to lead this nation.I believe every child can learn and every school can teach. I went to Washington to challenge what I call the soft bigotry of low expectations. That's a system that, in some cases, passes children through grade after grade, year after year without learning the basics. It's not right. It's not right for our country. We've raised the standards. We're now measuring early, so we can solve problems before they're too late. I believe in local control of schools. We're closing an achievement gap in America and we're not going to go back to the old days. (Applause.)I believe we have a moral responsibility to honor our seniors with good health care. I went to Washington to solve problems, not to pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. I saw a problem in Medicare. Medicine had changed, but Medicare hadn't. You know, we pay $100,000 or so for a heart surgery for a Medicare patient, but not one dime for the prescription drugs to prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. That doesn't make any sense for our seniors. It doesn't make any sense for the tax-payers. I brought Republicans and Democrats together. I signed a bill that modernizes Medicare. Seniors will get prescription drugs in 2006 and we're not going to go back to the old days. (Applause.)I believe in the energy and innovative spirit of our workers, our small business owners, our farmers, our ranchers, and that's why we unleashed that energy with the largest tax relief in a generation. (Applause.)When you're out gathering up the vote, remind your friends and neighbors about what this economy has been through. The stock market started to decline before Dick Cheney and I got to Washington. Then we had a recession. Then we had some citizens forget what it means to be a responsible American. They didn't tell the truth. We passed tough laws. It is abundantly clear now in America: We will not tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of our country. (Applause.)And then the enemy hit us. And that hurt us. That hurt our economy. You know it hurt the economy. But this economy is strong, and it is getting stronger. We've been growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. It's growing because of the spirit of the people. It's growing because of those tax cuts. (Applause.)We've added 1.7 million new jobs last year. We've added 107,000 manufacturing jobs since January. The national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent, which is lower than the average of the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.) There's still work to do in parts of Ohio, I understand that. That's why I support opportunity zones, places like Summit County, to give companies relief and incentives so that they can expand to places where the manufacturing sector has been hurt. No, there are things we're going to do, but this economy is strong and it's growing stronger. We're not going to go back to the old days of tax and spend. (Applause.)I believe the most solemn duty of the President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)I'm running for President with a clear and positive plan to build a safer world and a more hopeful America. I am running with a compassionate conservative philosophy that government should help people improve their lives, not try to run their lives. (Applause.) I believe this nation wants steady, consistent, principled leadership, and that is why with your help we're going to win a great victory in November. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: The world in which we live and work is changing. I understand that. The generation of our dads and granddads, a man generally had one job and one career, and the company he worked for paid for the pension plan and health care. This world we're living in is different. The workforce is changing. Women are working inside the house and now outside the house. And many workers change careers and jobs over their lifetime.And, yet, the most fundamental of our systems -- the tax code, health coverage, pension plans and worker training -- were created for yesterday, not tomorrow. I am running to change those systems so all citizens are equipped, prepared and, thus, truly free to make your own choices, so you can pursue your own dreams. (Applause.)Now, I understand that a hopeful society is one that has got a growing economy. If we want to keep jobs here in America and expand the job base, America must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.) That means less regulations on our business owners. (Applause.) That means we got to do something about these frivolous lawsuits that plague our small businesses. (Applause.)If we want to keep jobs here, if we want to -- Congress needs to pass my energy plan. (Applause.) It is a plan that encourages conservation. It is a plan that encourages the use of renewables, like ethanol and biodiesel. It is a plan that says we'll explore technologies to make sure we consume energy in different ways. It is a plan that encourages clean coal technology. It is a plan that allows us to explore for natural gas in environmentally friendly ways. It is a plan that recognizes to keep jobs here in America, we must be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)To keep jobs in this country, we've got to reject economic isolationism. See, we've opened up our markets -- just not me, other Presidents, as well, from both parties have opened up our markets because it's good for you, the consumer. See, if you've got more products to choose from, you're likely to get that which you want at a better price and higher quality. That's how the market works. And so what I'm saying to places like China, you treat us the way we treat you. Opening up markets is good for our workers. It's good for our farmers. See, we can compete with anybody, anywhere, anytime, so long as the rules are fair. (Applause.)To make sure we keep jobs here we've got to be wise about how we spend your money in Washington. And we've got to keep your taxes low. (Applause.) Taxes are an issue in this campaign. I'll tell you why. The fellow I'm running against has so far proposed $2.2 trillion in new spending. Yes.AUDIENCE: Booo.THE PRESIDENT: No, I know. That's a lot -- even for a senator from Massachusetts. So they asked him how he's going to pay for it and he said, well, we're just going to tax the rich. We've heard that before, haven't we? Let me tell you a couple things wrong with this ""tax the rich.""First of all, you can't raise enough money by taxing the rich to pay for $2.2 trillion. You raise about $680 billion -- therefore, there is a tax gap. Guess who always gets to fill the tax gap? Yes, you do. ""Tax the rich,"" yes, we've heard it. The rich hire lawyers and accountants for a reason, because they want to stick you with the bill. We're not going to let John Kerry tax you. We're going to win in November. (Applause.)Now that we're on taxes, let me say something about the tax code. It's a complicated mess. It's a million pages long. It takes six billion hours a year to fill out the tax forms in this country. In a new term, I'm going to bring Republicans and Democrats together to simplify this tax code so it's more fair for you. (Applause.)In a changing world, the skills that are required for the jobs of the 21st century change. We have a skills gap in America in some communities. Some jobs are gone, new jobs arrive. In order to help our workers, I'm a big believer in the community college system, to make the systems available so people can gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. As well, in a changing world, most new jobs filled by people -- are filled by people with at least two years of college, yet, one in four of our students gets there. That's why I believe in early intervention programs in high school to help our at-risk students. That's why I know we've got to place a new focus on math and science. Over time, we'll require a rigorous exam before graduation. See, by raising the performance in our high schools and by expanding Pell grants for low- and middle-income families, more Americans will start their career with a college diploma. (Applause.)In this time of change, we've got to do something about the health care system. There's a big difference in this campaign on health care. You listen carefully to what my opponent's laying out, and it says one thing. The federal government's going to run it.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I want you to run it. (Applause.) I want you to be the decision-maker. So here's some practical ways to help. First of all, we'll take care of the poor and the needy by expanding community health centers all around the country. We have a duty and an obligation to do so. It makes sense that those folks get good health care in these centers and not in the emergency rooms of our hospitals. (Applause.)Secondly, we'll continue to expand the children's health care program for low-income Americans. In order to make sure health care is available and affordable, we're going to help our small business owners. One-half of the uninsured, currently uninsured, work for small businesses. There's a reason why small businesses can't afford health care. They ought to be allowed to pool together their risk so they can buy insurance at the same discount big businesses can. (Applause.) That makes sense. That's a commonsense way to make sure the control of health care is in your hands. My opponent opposes that.I'll tell you another thing we need to do to make sure health care is available and affordable. We've got to do something about these junk lawsuits that are running up the cost of medicine and running good doctors out of practice. (Applause.) You cannot be pro-doctor, pro-patient, pro-hospital, and pro-trial lawyer a the same time. See, I think you have to make a choice. My opponent made his choice, and he put a trial lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice: I'm standing with the docs and patients; I'm for medical liability reform now. (Applause.) In all we do, we'll make sure the medical decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C.In a changing society, it helps bring stability in people's life if they own something. The home ownership rate under my administration is the highest it's ever been in America. (Applause.) Over the next four years, we'll continue to expand the home ownership policies to every corner of America. I love the idea of somebody opening up the door where they live and saying, welcome to my home, welcome to my piece of property. (Applause.)As well, we've got to think different about our retirement systems. You might remember the 2000 campaign, when people said, well, if George W. gets in, they're going to take away your Social Security check. You still got your check, didn't you? So here's my message to our seniors: Don't worry about what they tell you in the campaign, the Social Security obligation will be fulfilled. And for us baby boomers, there's enough money in the system to take care of us. But because there's a lot of baby boomers getting ready to retire, we need to worry about our children and our grandchildren when it comes to Social Security. I believe younger workers ought to be allowed to take some of their own tax money and set up a personal savings account that they can call their own that the government cannot take away. (Applause.)In this world of change, there are some things that do not change, the values we try to live by: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In changing times, we'll support the institutions that give our lives direction and purpose: our families, our schools, our religious congregations. We believe in a culture of life in which every person matters and every being counts. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. Since the terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we've fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear. We're defending the homeland. We're reforming and strengthening our intelligence services. We're strengthening our all-volunteer army -- which will remain an all-volunteer army. (Applause.) We are staying on the offensive. We are striking the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)We will continue to spread freedom and liberty in the broader Middle East and around the world, and we will prevail. (Applause.) Our strategy is -- see, you think about the world the way it was a while back: Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering danger; and al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks.Because we acted, a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda have been brought to justice. (Applause.)We've led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer. This progress involved careful diplomacy, clear moral purpose, and some tough decisions. And the toughest came on Iraq. Saddam Hussein was a threat. We knew his record of aggression, support for terrorist organizations. Saddam Hussein used weapons of mass destruction. He fired missiles at our pilots which were enforcing the world sanctions. He slaughtered his own people. Saddam Hussein was a threat. And after September the 11th, we must always remember we must take threats seriously, before the fully materialize. (Applause.)That is the reality of the world in which we live. I recognized that reality, and I went to the Congress. Congress debated the issue. They voted overwhelmingly to authorize the use of force. They had looked at the same intelligence I did, remembered the same history I did, and voted overwhelmingly for force. My opponent looked at the same intelligence I did, and when the vote came to authorize force, he voted, ""yes."" I guess now it depends on what the meaning of ""yes"" is in his mind. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Flip-flop! Flip-flop! Flip-flop!THE PRESIDENT: Before the Commander-in-Chief commits our troops into harm's way, he must try every other alternative. And so I went to the United Nations hoping that diplomacy would work. The United Nations debated the issue, and voted 15 to nothing, the U.N. Security Council, to say to Saddam Hussein: disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences. I believe when an international body speaks, it must mean what it says. (Applause.)As he had for 16 other resolutions, Saddam Hussein ignored the United Nations. The other night, my opponent suggested we probably should have passed the 18th resolution. (Laughter.) What good would a resolution do after he ignored the first 17? As he had for a decade, he wasn't about to listen to the demands of the free world. As a matter of fact, when they sent inspectors in, it is now a fact that Saddam Hussein was systematically deceiving the inspectors. Part of my opponent's plan, as articulated in Miami, said, well, we should have let the inspectors work. They weren't working. He was deceiving them. He was hoping the world would turn away. So I had a choice to make at this point in time: Do I take the word of a madman, forget the lessons of September the 11th, or take action to defend this country? Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)We didn't find the stockpiles we all thought were there. But, remember, Saddam Hussein had the capability of making weapons of mass destruction. He could have passed that capability onto a terrorist enemy, and that was a risk we could not afford to take after September the 11th. Knowing what I know today, I would have made the same decision. America and the world are better off with Saddam in a prison cell. (Applause.)Because we acted to defend our country, 50 million people now live in freedom in Afghanistan and Iraq. (Applause.) I want you to remind your friends and neighbors about the Afghan story. You realize, almost three-and-a-half years ago, the Taliban, these ideologues of hate, would not yet -- let many young girls go to school. Imagine a society in which young girls weren't allowed to go to school. When their mothers didn't toe the line on their ideology, they'd take them in the public square and whip them. Sometimes, they shot them in the sports stadium. It was a dismal, dark society.Today, 10 million Afghan citizens have registered to vote, 41 percent of whom are women, and they're having a presidential election later on this month. (Applause.) Think about that. Freedom is powerful. Freedom has converted a society that was dark and gloomy to one of hope and light.In Iraq, there's a brave Prime Minister named Prime Minister Allawi. They're going to have elections in January. It's hard work there. I know it's hard work. But you can be realistic and optimistic at the same time. We got a good plan. We're training the Iraqis so they can do the hard work. A hundred-thousand of them are trained. They're taking action today against some of those terrorist thugs. Slowly but surely, their forces are getting up, and some point in time, they'll be ready to defend themselves. We're helping to rebuild that country. Other nations are involved. They're having conferences here and conferences there. I'll tell you one thing, a summit isn't how you solve the problem. (Applause.) I've been to a lot of summits -- I've never seen one that brought a terrorist to justice.No, we've got a plan and it's working. Mr. Zarqawi's got one -- he's got one weapon, and that is to shake our will, because we've got good conscience, because we care about human life and human dignity. Every life is precious. That's his one weapon. But when America gives its word, America will keep its word for the Iraqi and Afghan citizens. (Applause.) We'll help these people move toward elections, we'll get them on the path to stability and democracy as quickly as possible, and then our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)We've got a great military. Proud of our military. (Applause.) And I want to thank the veterans who are here for having set such a great example for those who wear the uniform. (Applause.) I also want to thank the military families who are here today. (Applause.) We appreciate your sacrifice. And I made a commitment to our families and to those who wear the uniform that you'll have all the resources you need to complete your missions.That's why I went to the Congress, September of 2003 and asked them for $87 billion of important funding, funding to support our troops in harm's way. We got great support there. Matter of fact, the support was overwhelming for the $87 billion. All but 12 United States senators voted for the funding, two of whom were my opponent and his running mate. I want you to remind your friends and neighbors this: there was only four members of the Senate that voted to authorize the use of force and didn't vote to fund our troops, two of whom would be my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: So they actually asked him, they said, why did you do that? He said, in one of the famous quotes of the 2004 campaign -- (laughter) -- I actually did vote for the $87 billion, right before I voted against it.AUDIENCE: Flip-flop! Flip-flop! Flip-flop!THE PRESIDENT: They kept pressing him. He said he was proud of the vote. Finally, he said it was a complicated matter, and, yet, incredibly enough, he came up with a new reason. Last week, he described his vote against funding the troops as a protest vote. He said it on national TV.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: When American troops are in harm's way and defending our country, they deserve better than to have a candidate for President use them as a protest vote. (Applause.) Oh, I forgot, I forgot. There's yet another explanation since then, and it happened at the debate. He said he made a mistake in how he talked about that vote. The mistake wasn't what Senator Kerry said, the mistake is what Senator Kerry did. (Applause.) In the debate -- in the debate my opponent also said something revealing when he laid out the Kerry doctrine. (Laughter.) He said this, that America has to pass a global test --AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: -- before we can use troops to defend ourselves. Senator Kerry's approach to foreign policy would give foreign governments veto power over national security decisions.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I have a different view. (Applause.) When our country is in danger, the President's job is not to take an international poll. The President's job is to defend America. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. The heart of my conviction is that liberty can help change societies for the better. You know, I spend time with the Prime Minister of Japan. He's a good friend. I was with New York -- I was in New York with him at the U.N. I said, by the way, I'm talking about you on the campaign trail. Do you mind? And he said, no, not at all. I didn't tell him I was going to tell you that he likes Elvis. (Laughter.)Nevertheless, here's why I like to bring him up. Wasn't all that long ago that our country was at war with Japan. My dad fought him, your dads and granddads fought him, as well. They were the sworn enemy. And after World War II, Harry Truman and other Americans believed that liberty can transform an enemy into an ally, and worked with Japan to promote democracy. Now, a lot of people then, I'm confident, were skeptical about that being able to happen. You understand why. We had just fought them. A lot of lives had been lost. But because Harry Truman stuck to those values, today I sit down at the table with the head of a former enemy, talking about the peace we all want, talking about how to work together to keep the peace. (Applause.)Liberty is powerful. It is powerful. I am confident that someday, an American President will be sitting down with a duly elected leader of Iraq talking about how to keep the peace in the greater Middle East, and our country will be better off for it, and our children and grandchildren will be able to grow up in a more peaceful world. (Applause.)I believe -- I believe that the women in the Middle East want to live in freedom. (Applause.) I believe that everybody wants their child to grow up in a free and peaceful society. I believe if given the chance, the people in that part of the world will embrace the most honorable form of government ever devised by man. And I'll tell you why I believe these things: Freedom is not America's gift to the world. Freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)This young century will be liberty's century. By promoting freedom at home and abroad, we'll build a safer world and a more hopeful America. By reforming our systems of government, we'll help more Americans realize their dreams. We'll work to spread ownership and opportunity to every corner of our country. We'll pass the enduring values of our country on to a young generation. We'll continue to work for peace and freedom around the world.You know, for all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation, when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. It's a time that requires firm resolve, clear vision, and a deep faith in the values that makes this a great nation. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. I'll never forget it. There were workers in hard hats there yelling at me at the top of their lungs: Whatever it takes. I remember trying to console some people coming out of that rubble. A guy grabbed me by the arm, he looked me straight in the eye, and he said: You don't let me down. Waking up every morning since then, trying to figure out how best to protect America. I will defend the security of the people of this country, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago -- four years ago, as I traveled your great state asking for the vote, I made this pledge. I said, if I was honored to be able to hold a office of the presidency, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of that office. With your help and with your hard work, I will do so again for four more years.Thanks for coming. God bless you all. Thanks for being here. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all very much for coming. Nothing like a little Dutch hospitality on the campaign trail.  (Applause.)I'm here to ask for your vote, that's what I'm doing today. (Applause.) I believe you've got to get out amongst the people and ask for the vote. And not only do I want your vote, I want your help. (Applause.) Go out and register your friends and neighbors to vote. Don't overlook the discerning Democrat. (Applause.) People like Zell Miller. (Applause.) And then when you register them to vote, get them headed to the polls. Then when you get them headed to the polls, tell them if you want a safer America, a stronger America, a better America, put Dick Cheney and me back in office. (Applause.)I wish Laura were here today. (Applause.) She is a great mom, a wonderful wife. I'm going to give you some reasons to put me back in, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Listen, I'm real proud to be -- I'm proud to be running with my friend, Dick Cheney. Look, I admit it, he doesn't have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) I didn't pick him because of his hair. I picked him because he's a man of good judgment, good experience, a man who gets the job done. (Applause.)I want to thank my friend, Pete Hoekstra, and his wife, Diane. (Applause.) Hoekstra is a good one, a fine member of the United States Congress. I look forward to working -- he said when we were coming in on the bus, he said, remind them we worked on the desks together. (Laughter.) I did. They put him the head of the Intelligence Committee. (Applause.) Believe me, that's a big deal. I'm looking forward to working with him to make sure we've got the best intelligence possible to protect our country. (Applause.)I want to thank the Mayor for being here. Mr. Mayor -- Mayor Al is with us today. I appreciate him coming. Just fill the potholes, Mr. Mayor, and everything will be fine. (Laughter and applause.) I appreciate, Mayor -- tell your police force how much we appreciate their sacrifice and service. And while you're thanking the police, thank those firefighters, too, for their service. (Applause.)And I want to thank my friend, Betsy DeVos, and her father-in-law, Rich. I want to thank all the grassroots activists who are here. (Applause.) Those are the people who put up the signs and make the phone calls. Thank the local officials who are here. I thank the Bellamy Brothers who are here -- my friends, the Bellamy Brothers. Good to see you guys; thank you for coming. (Applause.) I want to thank the Holland Public High marching band for coming today. (Applause.) Make sure you hustle back to class and start studying. (Laughter.)Here's what I believe. I believe with your help, we will carry Michigan and win a great victory in November. (Applause.) I'm looking forward to campaigning in your state. I'm looking forward to spending a lot of time here. I'm going to tell the people where I stand, what I believe, and where I'm going to lead this nation for the next four years. (Applause.)I believe every child can learn and every school must teach. (Applause.) I went to Washington to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations, to raise the standards, to measure early and solve problems before it's too late. I went to stop this practice of just shuffling children through the schools grade after grade, year after year, without learning the basics. (Applause.) I went to make sure Washington trusts the local people to make the right decisions for their schools. We're closing the achievement gap in America, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)I believe we have a moral responsibility to provide our seniors with good health care. (Applause.) I knew Medicare was an important program, but it wasn't changing with the times. See, we pay $100,000 for heart surgery, but not the prescription drugs to prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. (Applause.) That didn't make any sense for our seniors. It didn't make any sense for our taxpayers. We've strengthened Medicare, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)I believe in the energy, innovation, and spirit of America's workers and farmers and small business owners. And that's why we unleashed that energy with the largest tax relief in a generation. (Applause.)When you're out rounding up the vote you remind your friends and neighbors what this economy has been through; we have been through a recession, we've been through corporate scandals -- by the way, we passed new laws and it's now clear, abundantly clear, that we're not going to tolerate dishonesty in the board rooms of America. (Applause.)And we went through that terror attack. And that attack hurt our economy. But we're overcoming those obstacles. Our economy has been growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. We're overcoming those obstacles because we've got great workers and great farmers. We're overcoming those obstacles because the tax relief is working. (Applause.)The national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent. That is lower than the average rate of the 1970s, the 1980s and the 1990s. (Applause.) Listen, there are some areas of our country that are still lagging behind, but we'll continue to promote a pro-growth, pro-small business policy, pro-entrepreneur policy for the next four years so people can find a good job here in America. (Applause.)I believe a President -- I believe it's a job of a President to confront problems, not pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. I believe the most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This is not going to happen on my watch. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: I am running for President with a clear and positive plan to build a safer world and a more hopeful America. I am running with a compassionate conservative philosophy that government should help people improve their lives, not try to run their lives. I believe this nation wants steady, consistent, principled leadership and that's why, with your help, we're going to win a great national victory in November. (Applause.)Listen, I understand the world we live in today is a changing world. Think about what happened in the workplace. Years ago our fathers and grandfathers worked for one job, one company; they had one pension plan, one health care plan; today people change careers and change jobs often. And the most startling change of all is that women now work not only in the house but outside the house. (Applause.)We have a changing world. And, yet, the fundamental systems haven't changed: the tax code, health coverage, pension plans, worker training were created for the world of yesterday, not tomorrow. So over the next four years we're going to transform these systems so that all citizens are equipped, prepared and, thus, truly free to be able to make their own choices and to be able to realize the great promise of this country. (Applause.)Listen, any hopeful society has got to be one in which the economy is growing, and I've laid out a plan to make sure that this economy of ours continues to grow. To keep jobs here in America, America must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.) That means less regulations and less lawsuits on our small business owners. (Applause.)Listen, to keep jobs here in America, we need an energy plan. I submitted a plan to the United States Congress, and it's stuck in there. It's a plan that encourages conservation, encourages the use of renewables, encourages clean coal technology, encourages the use of technology to make sure we explore for hydrocarbons in environmentally friendly ways -- but it's a plan that recognizes to keep jobs here, we need to be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.) To keep jobs here, we've got to be wise about how we use our natural resources, including water. And that starts with keeping the Great Lakes water in the Great Lakes Basin. (Applause.)See, earlier this year, my opponent said a decision about Great Lakes water diversion would be a delicate balancing act.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That kind of sounds like him, doesn't it? (Applause.) My position is clear: my administration will never allow the diversion of Great Lakes water. (Applause.)Listen, to keep jobs here, we've got to make sure we open up foreign markets to our products. See, if we open up markets -- we open up our market, it's good for you we do. See, the economy works this way: if you have more choices in the marketplace, you're likely to get the product you want at a better price and higher quality. So what I'm telling the places like China is you treat us the way we treat you. And the reason I'm saying that is I know we can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere if the rules are fair. (Applause.)To create jobs here in America, to make sure this economy continues to grow we've got to be wise about how we spend your money, and we've got to keep your taxes low. (Applause.) Taxes are an issue in this campaign. I'm running against a fellow who's promised at least $2 trillion in new money so far.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And we haven't even gotten in the stretch run yet. So I said to him the other day, well, how are you going to pay for them? And he said, that's easy, just tax the rich.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: We've heard that before, haven't we? First of all, you can't raise enough money by taxing the rich to cover his $2.2 trillion of new spending. There is a tax gap. Guess what he's thinking? Guess who he thinks is going to fill the tax gap when he can't make it with the rich? Yes.Let me tell you what else -- you've heard that I'm going the tax the rich before, haven't you? That's why the rich hire accountants and lawyers so you get stuck with the bill. But we're not going to let him tax you. We're going to win in November. (Applause.)Let me tell you something else we've got to do about this tax code: we've got to change it. It's a complicated mess. It's full of special-interest loopholes. In a new term I'm going to bring the Republicans and Democrats together to simplify the tax code, to make the tax code more fair. (Applause.) We want more people working than spending time -- than the time they have to spend on filling out all these forms. Do you realize Americans spend about 6 billion hours a year on federal taxes. That's one complicated code that needs to be fixed and will be fixed. (Applause.)In a changing world we've got to recognize, we've got to help our workers gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. Jobs are changing, sometimes the skill sets aren't. That's why I'm such a big believer in the community college system around America. I also understand that most new jobs are filled by people with at least two years of college. Yet, only one in four of our students gets there. That's why in high schools we'll fund early intervention programs to help students at risk. We must place a new focus on math and science. Over time, we will require rigorous exam before graduation. By raising performance standards in high school, by expanding Pell Grants for low and middle-income families we will help more Americans start their career with a college diploma. (Applause.)Times have changed, we've got to do more to make sure healthcare is available and affordable. More than half of the uninsured in America are small business employees and their families. Small businesses are having trouble affording health care. In order to help the families who work for these companies, we must allow small firms to join together so they can purchase insurance at the discounts available to big companies. (Applause.)We want people owning and managing their own health plans, and that's why I believe we ought to expand health savings accounts. I want to expand community health centers so poor people can find good health care all across America, particularly in our poor counties.I know in order to make sure we've got good docs practicing medicine, to make sure health care is affordable, we need to stop these junk lawsuits. (Applause.) You cannot be pro-doctor, pro-patient, pro-hospital, and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice: I'm for medical liability reform now. (Applause.)Our plan to improve the quality of health care is practical, it's a commonsense plan to make health care more accessible, more affordable, and to keep the good docs practicing medicine. I believe that health care decisions should be made by doctors and patients, not by Washington, D.C. bureaucrats. (Applause.)We have a difference of opinion in this campaign. I'm running against a fellow who's put out a health care plan that is massive, it is complicated, it is a blueprint to have the government control your health care.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And he can't pay for his plan. Today, there's an independent study out that says his health care plan today would cost taxpayers $1.5 trillion new dollars.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That's just the kind of plan you would expect from a senator from Massachusetts. (Applause.)In a new term, I'll continue to promote an ownership society in America. In changing times, ownership can bring stability to your lives. One of the great statistics of the modern -- of the modern -- of the last couple of years, is the home ownership rate is at an all-time high in America. (Applause.) We've got a plan to continue home ownership in America. I love the fact, when people from all walks of life can open up their door where they're living and say, welcome to my home, welcome to my piece of property. (Applause.)We need -- we need to -- listen. On Social Security, we need to -- I want the younger workers here to listen carefully to this debate on Social Security. If you're -- if you're on Social Security today, nothing is going to change. I do not care what the D.C. politicians will tell you. Nobody is going to take away your benefits. And if you're a baby boomer, you're in pretty good shape when it comes to Social Security. (Applause.)But we need to worry about our children and grandchildren, when it comes to the Social Security system. (Applause.) I think we need to think differently when it comes to our children and grandchildren. I think we ought to allow young workers to put aside some of their own tax money in a personal savings account, to make sure Social Security fulfills the promise. (Applause.)If you listen carefully to the rhetoric in this campaign, I'm running against a fellow who wants to expand government. We want to expand opportunity for every single citizen of this country. (Applause.)I also recognize, in the world of change, some things do not change. The values we try to live by do not change: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In times of change, we'll support the institutions that gives our lives direction and purpose: our families, our schools, our religious congregations. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person counts and every being matters. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of society. (Applause.) And I stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. Since the terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth, not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. (Applause.) Our strategy is clear. We're defending the homeland, transforming our military, and strengthening our intelligence services. We're staying on the offensive. We are striking the terrorists abroad, so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We will work to advance liberty in the broader Middle East and throughout the world and we will prevail. (Applause.) Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaeda. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a gathering threat, and Al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks.Because we acted, because we led the government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror, Pakistan is capturing terrorists, Saudi is making raids and arrests, Libya is dismantling its weapons programs, the army of Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's known leadership has been brought to justice. (Applause.)We have led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer. This progress involved careful diplomacy, clear moral purpose, and some tough decisions. And the toughest came on Iraq. We knew Saddam Hussein's record of aggression and support for terror. We knew his long history of pursuing, even using, weapons of mass destruction. And we know that after September the 11th, our country must think differently. We must take threats seriously before they fully materialize. (Applause.)In Saddam Hussein we saw a threat. I went to the United States Congress and members of both political parties, including my opponent, looked at the same intelligence, remembered the same history, and recognized Saddam Hussein was a threat. They voted the authorization of force. They said, go ahead and use force if you need to; he's a threat. Before the Commander-in-Chief commits troops into harm's way, we must have tried all alternatives. That's why I went to the United Nations. I was hopeful that diplomacy could deal with this threat. I was hopeful diplomacy would work.The United Nations looked at the same intelligence I did, they remembered the same history we remembered, and voted 15 to nothing to say to Saddam Hussein: disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences. (Applause.)The world spoke, but as he had for over a decade, he ignored the resolutions of the United Nations. He wasn't about to listen to the demands of the free world. As a matter of fact, when the U.N. sent inspectors into find the truth, he systematically deceived them. So at this point, I have a choice to make. I have a decision to make. The decision only comes to the Oval Office, a decision no President wants to make, but must be -- must be prepared to make, and that is: Do I trust the word of a madman, forget the lessons of September the 11th -- or take action to defend this country? Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: Because we acted -- because we acted to defend ourself, more than 50 million people are now free. (Applause.) That makes the world more peaceful. Think about Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago that young girls weren't allowed to go to school, and their mothers got whipped in the public square because they didn't toe the line of the Taliban. These people were barbaric people. They had hijacked a good religion, and converted it into an ideology of hate. Today, in Afghanistan, more than 10 million people, 40 percent of whom are women, have registered to vote in the upcoming presidential election. (Applause.)Despite ongoing acts of violence, Iraq now has a strong Prime Minister, a national council, and national elections are scheduled in January. (Applause.) We're standing with the people in those countries, because when America gives its word, America must keep its word. (Applause.) And by standing with them, we're also serving a vital and historic cause that will make our country safer. See, free societies in the Middle East will be hopeful societies, which no longer feed resentments or breed violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight terrorists, instead of harboring them, and that helps us keep us safe.So our mission in Afghanistan and Iraq is clear: We will help the new leaders train their police and their armies, so the people of Afghanistan and Iraq can do the hard work of defending freedom. (Applause.) We will help them -- we will help them move toward elections, we'll get them on the path of stability and democracy as quickly as possible, and then our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)We've got a great United States military, people like Lance Corporal Russell Bullock who's with us today. (Applause.) I've had the honor of meeting people like Russell, men and women who wear our uniform. I've seen their great decency and unselfish courage. I want to thank the veterans who are with us today for having set such a great example. (Applause.)And I believe the government has a commitment, has an obligation to those who wear our uniform. They must have all the resources they need to complete their missions. That's why a year ago I went to the United States Congress and proposed $87 billion of supplemental funding to support our troops in combat in both Iraq and Afghanistan. (Applause.) It was a very important piece of legislation. As a matter of fact, most members of the United States Congress understood its importance. We had great bipartisan support for this request -- so strong that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against it -- two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: When you're out gathering the vote, when you're out convincing people to go to the polls, remind them that only four United States Senators voted to authorize the use of force and then voted against funding our troops, and two of those four are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: They said, Why did you do that? And he said, well, I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it. Now, I know Holland, Michigan well enough to know not many people talk like that around here. (Laughter.) And they kept pressing him. They kept pressing him. He said he was proud of his own -- he finally just said, the whole thing is a complicated matter.There is nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)The Commander-in-Chief must have clear vision and mean what he says when he speaks. When it comes to Iraq, my opponent has more different positions than all his colleagues in the Senate combined. Senator Kerry once said it would be naive, to the point of grave danger, not to believe that left to his own devices Saddam Hussein will provoke, misjudge, or stumble into a future, more dangerous confrontation with the civilized world. Then, in 2002 he voted for the war, but then voted against funding for our troops. When the heat got on in his Democrat primary he declared himself the anti-war candidate. Then, later -- earlier this summer he said he would have still voted to go to war even knowing everything we know today. Then about 10 days ago he adopted the language of his one-time rival, Howard Dean, saying it was the wrong war at the wrong time -- even though he said earlier it was the right decision and he supported it. (Laughter.)Here's the latest wrinkle. Here's the latest wrinkle -- I'm trying to figure out what he believes. He said: we're spending too much money in Iraq -- even though he earlier criticized me for not spending enough. One thing about his position is clear, if he had had his way, Saddam Hussein would still be in power and would be a threat to our security and peace in the world.Listen, I want to thank our friends and neighbors -- friends and allies for their contributions. I've spent a lot of time doing that. I appreciate the fact -- we've got nearly 40 nations involved in Afghanistan, some 30 nations involved in Iraq helping us to spread freedom and peace. But I will never -- as I build coalitions over the next four years, as I continue to work with friends and neighbors I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. I believe the wisest use of American strength is freedom.I like to share stories of my time with different leaders around the world, and one of them is -- one of the leaders I admire a lot is Prime Minister Koizumi, of Japan. Think about that -- one of the people with whom I have good relations is the leader of a country that my dad was at war with -- your dads or granddads, husbands, grandfathers were at war with them. We had a bloody war with Japan, a violent war.So World War II was over, after we had won. My predecessor, Harry Truman, and other Americans believed that liberty could transform enemies into allies. They stood the line. There was a lot of skepticism during those times. But they stood strong for the values that we believe in. And as a result of helping Japan become a democracy, today I sit down at the table with Prime Minister Koizumi talking about the peace, talking about how to make the world a more hopeful place, talking about working together to spread the peace we all yearn for. (Applause.) Someday, an American President will be sitting down with a duly elected leader of Iraq talking about the peace. And our children and grandchildren will be able to grow up in a much better world. (Applause.)And I believe -- I believe that millions in the Middle East want to be free. I believe women in the Middle East long for a day of their freedom. (Applause.) I believe that if given the chance, they will embrace the most honorable form of government ever devised by man. I believe these things, because I understand freedom is not America's gift to the world. Freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)This young century will be liberty's century. By promoting freedom at home and freedom abroad, we'll build a safer world and a more hopeful America. By reforming our systems of government, we'll help more Americans realize their dreams. We'll spread ownership and opportunity to every corner of this country. We'll pass the enduring values of our country on to a new generation. We'll continue to make the world a more free and, therefore, a more peaceful place.For all Americans, these years in our history will stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation, when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. It's a time that requires firm resolve, clear vision, and deep faith in the values that make us a great nation. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I'll never forget. There were workers in hard hats there yelling at the top of their lungs: Whatever it takes. I remember trying to console the people coming out of the rubble. A guy looked me in the eye, bloodshot eyes. He said: You do not let me down. Ever since that day, I've woken up -- I wake up every morning, ever since that day, thinking about how better to protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago -- four years ago, as I traveled this great country and your wonderful state asking for the vote, I made a pledge. I said that if you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the dignity and the honor of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, with your hard work, I will do so for four more years.God bless. Thank you all for coming. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thanks for being here. Go ahead and be seated. We've got some work to do here. (Laughter.) Thanks for such a warm welcome here in the great state of North Carolina; it's nice to be back here. (Applause.) I'm here asking for the vote and I'm here to ask for your help. (Applause.) Gosh, there's a lot of people back there -- can you hear me back there? (Applause.) That's good. Thanks  for coming.The first thing I'd like you to do is ask you to register your friends and neighbors to vote. (Applause.) And while you're doing that, don't overlook discerning Democrats like Zell Miller. (Applause.) And then after we get them registered to vote, when it comes voting time, head them to the polls and remind them if they want a safer America, a stronger America, a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney because in office. (Applause.)Listen, we've got an interesting way to talk about some issues today. One of the things you've got to know is I've got a reason to run again. I'm asking for the vote because there's more to do to make this country a safer place and a better place for everybody; a more hopeful place for those of us who live here in America. And so I asked some of our fellow citizens here to share some ideas, or to discuss some of the ideas I have about a new term. I think you're going to find it interesting, I hope you do.Before I begin to talk with them about ways to make this country a more hopeful place, I do want to tell you that I lucked out when Laura said ""yes."" (Applause.) One way to maybe look at this race is you can judge the nature of a fellow by the company he keeps. (Applause.) I'm keeping great company when it comes to Laura Bush, I'm proud of her. (Applause.) Listen, when I asked her to marry me, she said, fine, just so long as I don't have to give any political speeches. (Laughter.) I said, okay, you won't have to give any speeches. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to my word. The other night the country got to see what I've seen in Laura for all these years: She's compassionate, she's decent, she's strong, she is a great mom, a wonderful wife, and a fantastic First Lady for our country. (Applause.)I want to thank my friend, Elizabeth Dole. She's a great United States Senator for the state of North Carolina. I want to thank my friend, Robin Hayes. I appreciate you being here, Congressman. I'm glad you're here. Nice to see you, sir. (Applause.) Congresswoman Sue Myrick, she's here. Thanks for coming, Sue. It's great to see you. (Applause.) Richard Burr, is he here? (Applause.) Where is he? Burr, how are you? (Applause.) I'm in town not only to talk about my race, I'm in town to talk about his race. He needs to be elected to the United States Senate. (Applause.)I want to thank Pat McCrory, the great Mayor of Charlotte, North Carolina. Mr. Mayor, thank you for coming. (Applause.) Cherie Berry is with us today. We got some statehouse folks. We got Patrick Ballantine, the next governor, with us today. (Applause.)I want to thank the grassroots activists who are here today. (Applause.) These people put up the signs and do the hard work. I want to thank you for what you have done and what you're going to do, which is, coming down the pike, turn people out to vote. We carried North Carolina last time, and with your help, we're going to carry it this time. (Applause.)I know Teresa Earnhardt is with us today. I'm proud you're here, Teresa. It's good to see you. Thanks for coming. There you are. Appreciate you being here. (Applause.) I was going to the NASCAR race in New Hampshire on Sunday, but I'm going down to help provide as much comfort as I can to the folks whose lives have been turned upside down by the hurricane that hit the coast so hard. I know it's affecting parts of North Carolina. We send our prayers to the people whose lives are being affected in your great state, and we stand ready to help when this storm passes through.I appreciate you all coming. Let me tell you something about what I believe. I believe government should stand side-by-side with people, not try to tell people how to run their life. (Applause.) I believe the proper role of government is to help people help themselves, not dictate to people. There's a fundamental difference in this campaign in philosophy of government. And in the course of the next days coming down the stretch, people are going to see a clear difference.Today I also want you to understand I understand the world of ours is changing, and the fundamental systems of government must change with the changing world. The government of the -- the society of ours has changed dramatically. For example, in the old days women used to stay at home. Now they're staying at home and working, they're inside the house and outside the house. (Applause.) That's a fundamental shift in our labor market. And, yet, the labor laws haven't changed. So we're going to talk about flex-time and comp-time today, to help women juggle the needs of work and family. We want the labor laws to be family-friendly here in America. We want them to adjust with the times. (Applause.)In the old days, you know, the day that her granddad worked for one company and one career. And today people are now changing jobs and careers oftentimes. And, yet, the worker training programs haven't adjusted with the times. You've got a work force where people are changing jobs often, you've got to have a worker training program that helps train people for the jobs which actually exist. And so we're going to talk about how to make sure the worker training programs here in America work.See, what I'm telling you is many of the systems of government were designed for yesterday. I'm running for President to make sure they're designed for tomorrow -- our tax system is designed for tomorrow, our health care systems are designed for tomorrow, our pension plans are designed for tomorrow. I want to make sure government helps people be able to realize their dreams here in the greatest country on the face of the Earth. (Applause.)***missed portion***I already worked through one mic. (Laughter.)In order to make sure there's a hopeful society, we've got to make sure this economy continues to grow. Now, when you're out gathering the vote, remind your friends and neighbors what this economy has been through. We've been through a recession. We've been through corporate scandals -- that meant some people forgot what it meant to be a responsible citizen. We passed laws that now make it clear we're not going to tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of our country. (Applause.)And we went through that attack on our country on September the 11th, 2001, that cost jobs. It affected our economy. We're overcoming these obstacles. These are obstacles in the way for economic growth and vitality. We're overcoming them because we've got great workers, great farmers and ranchers, great small business owners, and because of tax relief. (Applause.)The economy has added 1.7 million jobs since August of last year. The national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent, which is lower than the average of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. (Applause.) The unemployment rate here in North Carolina is 5 percent. The tax relief we -- the economic stimulus plan we passed is working. And so the fundamental question is, how are you going to make sure this recovery is sustained economic growth. I'm going to talk a little bit about that if you don't mind.First, we need an energy plan to make sure jobs stay right here in America. In order to make sure people can find work, this country must have an energy plan. (Applause.) I submitted one to Congress that said we're going to encourage conservation, we'll use renewables like ethanol and biodiesel, we'll use clean coal technologies, we'll use technologies to explore in environmentally friendly ways for natural gas. But it's a plan that understands this: In order to make sure people can find work here in America today and tomorrow, we need to be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)In order to make sure we have jobs here in America, we need to do something about these junk lawsuits that are threatening small business owners. (Applause.) In order to do something about making sure we got jobs here in America, we got to be wise about our regulatory policy. Many small business owners fill our regulations. I can't guarantee you whether anybody in the federal government has ever read them. (Laughter.) But I do know paperwork is costly.In order to make sure jobs stay in America we got to have wise trade policy. Now, we've opened up our markets for foreign goods, which is good for the American consumers. If you have more choices in the marketplace you're more likely to get the product you want at a better quality and a better price. So what I'm saying to other nations is, you treat us the way we treat you. (Applause.) That's why -- that's why we were the first administration to invoke the China Textile Safeguard. That's why we were the first administration to file a WTO case against China. The message is clear: If you want to trade with us, you treat us fairly, because Americans can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere if the rules are fair. (Applause.)Two other things I want to tell you about in order to make sure jobs are here. See, I got a six-point economic plan to make sure the recovery that we're witnessing is a lasting recovery, so people can realize their dreams here in America. Listen, a hopeful society is one not only that changes fundamental systems to help people, but it's one in which the economic vitality is strong enough for people to be able to find work, or start their own business, or have a chance to realize their dreams.Now, we got to be wise about how we spend your money in Washington if we're going to make sure this economy continues to grow. Here's my view of things. We're going to set priorities, and then we're going to let you keep as much money as we possibly can. Because once the federal government meets those priorities, I think you can spend your money better than the federal government can. (Applause.)To make sure this economy grows, we got to keep your taxes low. (Applause.) We're going to talk to a small business owner here in a minute, a woman-owned business. One of the most amazing -- (applause) -- one of the most important changes that has taken place in this changing world is that there are 10 million women-owned businesses here in America. What a phenomenal change in society, isn't it? (Applause.)I think tax policy ought to encourage the formation of women-owned businesses, and I think tax policy ought not to harm women-owned businesses. Do you realize most businesses today, small businesses are sub-chapter S corporations, or limited partnerships, which means they pay tax at the individual income tax level? So when you cut individual income taxes, you're really helping small businesses. You're helping women-owned small businesses. (Applause.)I think raising taxes on small businesses would be a mistake. It would hurt our economy. I'm running against a fellow who's promised $2.2 trillion in new federal spending so far. And we haven't even got to the stretch run yet. So they said, how are you going to pay for it? He said, oh, that's simple, we'll just tax the rich. You run up the top two brackets of the individual income taxes, you're taxing about a million small businesses here in America. Seventy percent of new jobs in America are created by small businesses, and you're taxing the job creators.That doesn't make any economic sense. You've heard the talk before, haven't you -- ""We're just going to tax the rich."" Yes. The rich hire accountants and lawyers, so you get stuck with the bill. You can't tax the rich enough to pay for $2.2 trillion of new spending. There's a tax gap. And guess who gets stuck with that tax gap? You do. But we're not going to let him tax you, because we're going to win in November. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Okay. Thank you. We've got work to do here.AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We've got a little work to do. Thanks. I told you one of the most amazing statistics is the fact there's 10 million small business owners. I think in the state of North Carolina, I think 45 percent of the small businesses are owned by women. That is an incredibly hopeful statistic, isn't it? (Applause.) It's a fantastic statistic.See, when I talk about a changing world, that's what I'm talking about. And so we got one of those entrepreneurs with us today. Stewart Gordon is with us. A business owner. (Applause.) The Buttercup, Inc. What do you do?MS. GORDON: We're a gift and stationery shop, and we started 29 years ago, five women with an investment of $500 each. Only in America. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Wait a minute. You're obviously still in business.MS. GORDON: We are. We're still going strong.THE PRESIDENT: Do you have employees?MS. GORDON: We have 37 talented women that work with us. (Applause.) We own our own building. And we have a good time. It's a nourishing environment, not only for us, our staff, but also for our customers. We are true steel magnolias. So with determination and a little hard work, The Buttercup is strong. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Good. The Buttercup is a sub-chapter S corporation. That means they pay tax at the individual income tax level. And so when you hear them coming out of Washington saying, oh, we're just going to tax the rich, keep The Buttercup in mind. See, when they run up the top two brackets, companies like The Buttercup get affected. And if they start taking money out of The Buttercup's coffers, it's less likely the women who work there are going to be able to keep their jobs.How many people did you hire this year, do you know?MS. GORDON: We hired six.THE PRESIDENT: Six people. See, that's what's happening in the economy. Six people hired by this small business here, six there. This economy is growing because the small business sector is strong. (Applause.) Tax policy ought to help women-owned business, not hurt women-owned businesses. Let's talk about flex-time, do you want to?* * * * *THE PRESIDENT: See, federal labor law -- hold on for a minute -- labor law prevents there to be maximum of flex-time. The labor law is stuck in the past. It was written when women stayed at home. The world has changed. We've got women now working in the house and out of the house, like I said, and that's good for our economy. But the labor laws need to adjust to allow moms to be able to juggle the needs of the workplace and the family. I'm running again because I want to change systems of government that prevent people from realizing their dreams.If you make it easier for a mother -- or a father, for that matter -- to be a good mom or a dad, it's more likely they're going to be a better employee and have a higher quality of life. (Applause.)Good job. Are you ready? Yes, she's ready. Frances, you're ready. My old buddy, Frances; we met before.One of the things we've changed is to change this concept of government -- getting people dependent upon government. We changed welfare laws in a more compassionate way, as far as I'm concerned. We made the system more compassionate, so as to help people realize their dreams.And Frances Cunningham is with us -- my old buddy, right?MS. CUNNINGHAM: I'm here.THE PRESIDENT: Until I asked her to come on the stage. (Laughter.) Mother of two.MS. CUNNINGHAM: Yes. Can you hear me?THE PRESIDENT: Oh, yes, they can hear you loud and clear.* * * * *THE PRESIDENT: You're doing good.MS. CUNNINGHAM: Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Frances is a great story, you know. She was on welfare. They have a great welfare department here, they said, let's help -- let's help somebody help themselves. That's what I'm telling you about. We're changing systems so people have a chance to realize dreams.Now what she's saying, she wants to go to the next level. Hopefully, somebody is listening out there in the camera that says, wait a minute, maybe Frances could make a --MS. CUNNINGHAM: And I have been promoted on my job, and it just opened up a lot of doors for me. And I'm sure a lot of women out here understand, you know, when you have to depend on the government to help you, that is fine for a while -- to help you get your life in order. And it's been great. And I just encourage business to just help one another and help people, and help us to become better citizens out here, and mothers and fathers, you know?THE PRESIDENT: That's good. You're doing great. (Applause.) Listen, she has the hardest job in America, though. I want you to know she's got the toughest job in America -- a single mother is the toughest job in America. (Applause.) And we need to help. And I appreciate you, you did great.I want to talk to Kema Jenkins. We're going to talk to Kema right now --MS. CUNNINGHAM: Can I say one more thing?THE PRESIDENT: Absolutely. You've got the mic and it's still on.MS. CUNNINGHAM: I just want to thank my supervisor.THE PRESIDENT: Where is your supervisor?MS. CUNNINGHAM: That's her, right there.THE PRESIDENT: Good job. Thanks for coming.MS. CUNNINGHAM: She's been very supportive.THE PRESIDENT: Appreciate you being here.MS. CUNNINGHAM: Give her a handshake for me.THE PRESIDENT: Handshake right now? Well, let me finish the thing here. (Laughter.)MS. CUNNINGHAM: Okay. All right. Thank you. And Mr. Jacobson, he's not here, Department of Social Service director, he's been like a mentor.THE PRESIDENT: That's good. See, people can make a difference in somebody's life. We can change one America one heart and one soul at a time if somebody just takes time out of their life to love a neighbor like you'd like to be loved yourself. (Applause.)Are you ready, Kema? I told you one of the real challenges we have is to help people have the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. We've got a really interesting story here in Kema Jenkins. She is a -- she's a good soul who -- well, tell us. You used to work for?MS. JENKINS: A textile company. That is now --THE PRESIDENT: Yes. You don't want to say its name? No? Okay. Pillowtex -- I will. (Laughter and applause.)* * * * *THE PRESIDENT: Let me -- if I can help say what you just said. Look, the government needs to help people gain the skills necessary to fill jobs. I know what it's like here with the textile industry, and so do you. It's been hit hard. But the amazing thing about your economy is that it is diversifying. There are health care jobs available. And the government I think has a responsibility to help people like Kema gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. (Applause.)Nobody likes jobs going away. But there's new opportunity. In a changing economy like ours, there are new opportunities for people. When an economy changes it certainly creates dislocation, and I understand that. And that's not good. But what is good is that jobs are replaced with higher-paying jobs so long as the people have the skill set necessary to fill the jobs. And that's what we're talking about here. Women need help. If they get laid off from work, they need help. That's why I'm such a big believer in the community college system, in helping people go back and gain the skills. (Applause.)You can't say -- government can't pass a law that says, Kema has got to go back to school. She's got to make up her own mind. She said, I want to embetter myself and is there a place to find help. I think it's a legitimate use of your taxpayer -- of your money, is to help somebody like Kema be able to realize dreams in the workplace. (Applause.)Now, let me ask you something. One of the interesting things about education -- I didn't see you all over there; that's the end zone. Okay, never mind. (Applause.)One of the interesting things about education is that as you increase your skill level, you increase your productivity. It means you're a more productive worker. And when you become more productive, you make more money. One of the interesting things about a changing economy is that our workers are more productive than ever before. That means instead of using a hoe, you use a backhoe. Or instead of using, you know, a regular old standard typewriter, you use a computer. In other words, that's an example of becoming more productive. (Applause.)But that creates a challenge for us. It creates a challenge for us in our society because the more productive workers become, the faster the economy has to grow so people can find work. That's why my six-point plan is essential to making sure people in a productive world can find work.So you worked there for Pillowtex for a while and -- so what's the difference in pay? I'm not -- maybe not exactly numbers. More, less, same?MS. JENKINS: I'm going to be making more this year than I've made the past 21 years at Pillowtex. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Yes. See, that's the great opportunity for women. (Applause.) It's the great opportunity for women in the workplace. If you can help a person with the skill set necessary to work, help them become more productive, they make more money. She's making more money in the beginning of a new career than she made at the end of her other career. And that's what's happening all around America. That's why it's important for us to change fundamental systems to help women -- and men, for that matter -- realize their dreams. And that's what we're talking about. It's helping people. It's a difference of philosophy. As opposed to saying, you know, you will be dependent on government, or, you will do this, or, you will do that -- my philosophy says, can we help you, and can we help you help yourself.In a changing world, helping people help themselves creates a more hopeful America. (Applause.)Let me talk about health care right quick. It's an issue in this campaign. There is a fundamental difference between what I believe and my opponent believes when it comes to health care. I believe the best health care decisions are made by doctors and patients. (Applause.) I believe it is essential that the federal government does not run your health care. (Applause.)And I put out some practical plans to help people. Do you know that about 50 percent of the working uninsured work for small businesses? And the reason why they're uninsured is because small businesses have trouble purchasing affordable health care for their employees. And, yet, most small business owners want to purchase affordable health care for their employees. I see a lot of the women business owners here nodding, they -- the best way to help small businesses and their employees and their families is to allow small businesses to pool together, to bind together across jurisdictional boundaries so they can buy insurance at the same discounts that big businesses get to do. (Applause.)Those are called association health plans. My opponent is against them. I think they make a lot of sense. Government should help people solve problems. The -- health savings accounts are a very interesting way for people to save money when it comes to health care, and to help small businesses afford insurance for their employees. Health savings accounts are basically catastrophic plans with a high deductible and that the employer and employee contribute, based upon the contractual arrangement, tax-free money into an account. So, in other words, if you've got -- say, the insurance company will pay for everything over $2,000, you cover from zero to $2,000 either as a contribution to your employee or the employee puts it in, and it's your money. And if you spend the $2,000, you replenish next year. If you spend nothing on your health care because you're a good exerciser, you make good choices, you've been lucky, things went well, that $2,000 is your money; it earns interest, tax-free; you carry it over from one year to the next, and then you've got a nest egg for the next year.And basically what it says is, it says that people make decisions on health care, not some faceless bureaucrat. It means that you've got a chance to control this health care plan. In a changing world, people change jobs and careers quite often, which means you take your health savings account with you wherever you go. (Applause.)To make sure health care is available and affordable, we're going to spend some money to make sure that children who are eligible for the low-income health programs at the government level get signed up. See, there's too many of the kids not signing up what they call S-chip. It's a good program and we ought to encourage families to take advantage of the low-income health programs for our children.I also want to tell you another interesting idea. Actually, we're doing it right now. To make sure health care is available for all of us, we're going to expand community health centers. Now, community health centers are places where the indigent and the poor can get primary care and preventative care. It's a good use of your money to expand community health centers. It's better that people get this kind of care and get this kind of care at a community health center, and not in an emergency room of a local hospital. (Applause.) And so, in a second term -- in a second term, we will expand community health centers to every poor county in America. (Applause.)Two other things on health care I want to talk about -- want to talk about Medicare. I went to Washington to fix problems, not pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. We had an issue in Medicare. We had an issue in Medicare. A lot of senior women were affected by a Medicare system that hadn't modernized. People say, what are you talking about? I say, well, Medicare would pay for the $100,000 for the heart surgery, but would not pay for the prescription drugs that might prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. That didn't make any sense. It didn't make any sense for Medicare recipients; it didn't make any sense for taxpayers.And so we're modernizing the system. They've got drug discount cards now available for our seniors. I urge our seniors to look at drug discount card. People are having great savings when it comes to prescription drug coverage, particularly our poor seniors, because we're helping them with the purchase of drugs. In 2005, there will be preventative screenings paid for by Medicare, for the first time ever in the system. It helps us solve problems by diagnosing problems early. And in 2006, our seniors will get prescription drug coverage. And the system makes sense. (Applause.)And finally -- finally, we've got a healer with us today, a doc, Andrea Torsone. One reason why it's hard for small businesses to afford health care, one reason why your health care costs are going up, one reason why docs are becoming less available for people is because these junk lawsuits are beginning to hurt the health care industry significantly. (Applause.) If you're a doctor and you're getting sued all the time, or your neighbor is getting sued all the time, you're going to practice defensive medicine so that you can defend yourself in a court of law. That costs -- practicing of defensive medicine, in other words, you're prescribing more than you need to do, you're just doing the extra X ray here, or extra test there -- that costs the federal government $28 billion a year, to practice defensive medicine. I mean, there is a direct correlation between these lawsuits and the cost of governmentWe need to do something about it. Too many good docs are leaving practice. Too many women are having trouble with keeping their OB/GYN. Particularly the OB part of the OB/GYN. And they're getting run out of business. I've talked to too many women who are pregnant and they don't have their local doc because the local doc had to surrender the practice due to the high cost of premiums caused by lawsuits. And that's not right. That's not right. Good health care for women, and good health care for every American depends on having a legal system that is reasonable. We need medical liability reform now. (Applause.)And this is an issue in this campaign. This is an issue in this campaign. There's a fundamental difference of opinion. See, I don't think you can be pro-doctor and pro-patient and pro-hospital and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) I think you have to choose. I think you have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put a trial lawyer on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice: I'm standing with the docs and patients. We're for medical liability reform in this campaign. (Applause.)All right, Doc. You are a -- what kind of doc?* * * * *THE PRESIDENT: See, this is a problem. Here is a kind, compassionate soul who is obviously talented, and went to school because she wanted to deliver babies. And the cost of doing medicine is so high because of lawsuits that she no longer does so. It's just one less person to help a woman and it's -- we got a national problem with this issue. She said her premiums have gone up 300 percent in a very brief period of time. That's because it's like a legal lottery out there, and you just keep filing these lawsuits, one after another. And it's happening state after state. Good people are saying, I'm through. I wish I could practice, I wish I could heal, I wish I could help, but I can't afford it anymore.And this is a living example of why we need medical liability reform in Washington, D.C. Listen, I believe that this is a national issue. I believe it is a national problem. And I know it's causing our budgets to go up, and that's why I submitted a plan to the House and the Senate. It passed the House; it's stuck in the Senate because there's too many trial lawyers in the United States Senate. (Applause.)I also want to share some thoughts with you about my most important duty, which is protect you and your children. That's the most important duty I have. (Applause.) Let me share some lessons I've learned from September the 11th.One, we face an enemy that has no conscience. They -- it's hard for us to understand people that will kill for the sake of an ideology of hatred, but they do. And, therefore, you cannot negotiate with thesepeople, you cannot hope for the best. You cannot sit down and maybe think, well, gosh, there's a chance we can rationalize with them. You cannot. And that's why our strategy in this government is to find them in places around the world so we do not have to face them here -- is to bring them to justice in foreign lands. (Applause.)Okay, hold on a second. Thank you all, but not yet.Secondly -- I've got more than one lesson to share with you. Secondly, this is a different kind of struggle, it's a different kind of war. There are places where these people can hide and wait and plan. And, therefore, I laid out a doctrine which said, if you harbor a terrorist, you're just as equally -- you're just as guilty as the terrorist. Now, when the President says something -- hold on for a second -- when the President says something, he better mean what he says, in order to make this world more peaceful. (Applause.) I meant what I said. I meant what I said.The Taliban ignored what we said. And thanks to a lot of really fine, fine soldiers, the Taliban is no longer in power in Afghanistan. And we're better off for it. (Applause.) The world is safer for it, and so is America. No longer does al Qaeda have a safe haven. See, these people are like parasites and they try to find a weak host so they can eventually, kind of, become the host. And as a result of removing the Taliban from power, we're safer. These al Qaeda no longer have safe haven there. There's still some hiding in remote regions of that part of the world, and we're after them. Day after day, we're slowly but surely dismantling the al Qaeda network. Seventy-five percent of their leaders and associates have been brought to justice. Over the next four years we'll continue to keep the pressure on. That's our duty to the American people.But I also want to tell you what else happened in Afghanistan. This is a country where many young girls didn't get to go to school. When I talk about ideologies of hate, I'm talking about people that would not allow girls to be educated. That's part of an ideology of hate. Their mothers were taken to the squares of that country and whipped, or killed in some cases, in the sports stadium, because they would not toe the line of this dark ideology. That's the way these people think. There is no -- (drop in tape.) As a matter of fact, freedom frightens them -- freedom of thought, freedom of religion, freedom of speech.Today in Afghanistan -- this is three years ago, which really isn't very long, when you think about it -- three years after these people were brutalizing much of that society, 10 million citizens, 41 percent of whom are women, have registered to vote in the upcoming presidential election. (Applause.) Isn't that fantastic? Think about that. This is a society which has gone -- which is going from darkness to light because of freedom. And we're better off for it. We're better off that Afghanistan is a free country. It helps us to have an ally in the war on terror there, as opposed to a place where the terrorists can hide.Third lesson is that we must take threats seriously, before they fully materialize. That's one of the lessons of September the 11th. It's a harsh lesson, but it's one we must never forget. Prior to September the 11th, planners and thinkers in Washington, D.C. could see a threat and say, well, we don't have to worry about it because it could never come and hurt us. That's what we thought. It wasn't that way during the Cold War, admittedly, but we had a plan, mutually assured destruction. But after the Cold War, we thought we were safe, didn't we? If you really think about the time, three short years ago, we felt like we were protected. And so when we saw threats we could decide to deal with it if we wanted to deal with it, or not. After that day, every threat must be taken seriously.In Saddam Hussein I saw a threat. I saw a threat because he was a sworn enemy of the United States of America. He was our enemy. As a matter of fact, they were firing missiles -- he was firing missiles at U.S. aircraft enforcing the world's sanctions. We had been to war with Saddam Hussein before; he had been to war in his neighborhood -- in other words, he was a destabilizing influence. He had terrorist ties. Abu Nidal killed Leon Klinghoffer, if you remember. Remember that incident? The guy was in Baghdad, as were people in his organization. Zarqawi, the beheader, was in and out of Baghdad, and he had a poisons network in Iraq. He was a terrorist. Saddam Hussein paid the families of suicide bombers. Suicide bombing is a terrorist activity. He had terrorist ties. He also had the capability of making weapons of mass destruction, and he had used weapons of mass destruction. And the intelligence I looked at and the intelligence Congress looked at said he actually had them there.So I saw a threat. And I went to the United States Congress and said, we got an issue here that we're going to have to deal with. Members of the Congress of both political parties looked at the very same intelligence I looked at -- the very same intelligence -- and they remembered the same history I remembered, and they concluded that Saddam Hussein was a threat, and authorized the use of force. My opponent looked at the same intelligence I looked at, and when they said, do you authorize the use of force, he voted ""yes.""Before the Commander-in-Chief commits troops into harm's way, before the Commander-in-Chief looks a mom or dad in the eye and says, I'm sending your son or daughter into harm's way, we must have tried all options -- all options. And I was hopeful diplomacy would solve this problem. I was hopeful that we could diplomatically deal with the threat. And so I went to the United Nations, said, we see a problem. They looked at the same intelligence I looked at, they remembered the same history I remembered, and with a 15-to-nothing vote in United Nations Security Council, they voted to tell Saddam Hussein: You disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences.Now, I told you when I say something, you better mean it if you're the President. I think when international bodies speak, they better mean it, as well. (Applause.) And they said this. Saddam Hussein, as he had for resolution after resolution after resolution after resolution, ignored this one. He wasn't about to disclose, disarm. So he didn't believe there would be serious consequences, I guess. As a matter of fact, when they sent inspectors in, the U.N. sent inspectors in, he systematically deceived them. And I knew he was deceiving them. So I have a choice to make at this point in time: Do I take the word of a madman and forget the lessons of September the 11th, or take action to defend our country? Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)Okay, hold on.AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Thank you all. Thank you all.A couple of other things I want to share -- let me share some other things with you right quick. We didn't find the stockpiles we thought we would find, the stockpiles that everybody thought was there. But I do know, I do know, I do know that he had the capability of making those weapons, and he could have passed that capability on to an enemy. And that's a risk we could not afford to take after September the 11th. Knowing what I know today, I would have made the same decision. (Applause.) The world is better off with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell, make no mistake about it. (Applause.)Prime Minister Allawi is coming here next week. He's a tough guy who believes that Iraq should be free. And he cares about the hopes and aspirations of the Iraqi people. He is -- I'm looking forward to meeting him. I think he's coming to speak to the Congress -- I hope I didn't let the cat out of the bag. Everybody knows that? Okay, good. (Laughter.) Hope he knows it. (Laughter.) I'm looking forward to the American people hearing him. It's important that we hear from someone there on the ground who -- who believes that people want to be free, believes that the people of Iraq really want to be free.Here's our strategy in both Afghanistan and Iraq. We're going to help the Iraqis hold elections. The Afghan people are holding their elections soon. There will be free elections in Iraq in January of this year. People want to vote. People want to participate. (Applause.) We're going to help train Iraqi police and army so they can defend themselves against the few who are trying to stop the dreams of the many in that country. We'll help them, and we're making progress. We're making progress. It's tough. Of course, it's tough, because there are killers there who are trying to shake our will and shake the will of the Iraqis. It's tough on the Iraqi citizens. These people are indiscriminately killing because they want to cause us to leave, and they want the Iraqis to grow weary of trying to be a free society. Listen to Allawi. He'll talk about what it means to be free.Once we get these folks trained and get them on the path to stability and democracy, our troops are coming home, with the honor they earned. (Applause.) And I appreciate those in the United States military. I'm proud you all are here. (Applause.)Here's the fourth lesson I want to share with you. The fourth lesson is, when we put troops in harm's way, they deserve the full support of the federal government, full support. (Applause.) That's why I went to the Congress and asked for $87 billion of support for our troops. And this is important funding, really important funding. As a matter of fact, it was so important that there was wide bipartisan support in the Senate and in the House. As a matter of fact, when I say ""wide bipartisan support,"" I'm talking only 12 members of the Senate voted against the funding -- two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: When you're out rounding up the vote, when you're rounding up the vote, remind people of this fact: only four members of the Senate voted to authorize the use of force, and then voted not to fund the troops -- two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.Now, you might remember, when they asked him, they said, why, and he said, well, I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it. There's not a lot of folks in Charlotte, North Carolina who speak that way, I can assure you. (Applause.)We've done hard work. We've done hard work. Because of the hard work we've done, this world is becoming more peaceful. I believe -- I believe in the transformational power of liberty. That's what I believe. It's the heart of much of what I think, is because I believe liberty can change enemies to allies, and change distressed societies to hopeful societies. I like to share with people my feelings about Japan. You know, Prime Minister Koizumi is a friend of mine. I like him. He's a good guy to talk to. And he is the Prime Minister of a country with which we were at war during my dad's lifetime. After all, he was there, as was your dads and granddads. Think about that. It wasn't all that long ago that Japan was the sworn enemy of the United States of America. We were fighting them. Young men went off to war and a lot didn't come back.And, yet, after World War II, Harry Truman and other American citizens believed that if Japan became a democracy the world would be better off. And that was hard work, really hard work. You can imagine why. You can imagine the moms here saying, what do you mean, working with Japan to make a democracy. They just killed -- caused great harm. And, yet, there was this unshakeable faith that liberty could change societies. And as a result of that unshakeable faith of a prior President and citizens of this country, I know sit down at the table with Prime Minister Koizumi talking about keeping the peace. Think about that. (Applause.)Some day -- some day an American President, whoever he or she may be -- (applause) -- will be sitting down, will be sitting down with a duly elected leader of Iraq talking about how to keep the peace in the greater Middle East. And our children and grandchildren will be better off for it. (Applause.)Liberty can change societies. Free societies are peaceful societies. Free societies help change the world. I believe everybody longs for freedom. And I believe this not because freedom is America's gift to the world, I believe it because freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)I'm here today to let you know I have a reason to seek the office again. I'm running to help transform systems of government so people can realize their dreams. I'm running again to continue to lead so this world will be a safer place. I'm running again because I want to help spread the peace we all want. I'm running again because I have great faith in the American people and have great faith in the values that make us a great nation. I know where I want to lead. And I want to thank your help -- for your help in helping us get there. With your help, we'll win a great victory in November of this year. God bless. (Applause.) God bless you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you for coming. Bienvenidos a la Casa Blanca. (Laughter.) Thanks for coming. Laura and I are thrilled to have you here. We welcome you to the -- to observe Hispanic Heritage Month. What a performance.  Thank you all very much. It was spectacular. (Applause.)President George W. Bush and Laura Bush watch the performance of Joaquin Cortes as he dances to a quintet of Flamenco musicians during a Hispanic Heritage Month celebration in the East Room of the White House Wednesday, Sept. 15, 2004. White House photo by Joyce Naltchayan. This is the month we celebrate great contributions of Latinos to our country. It's a special month. It really echoes our diversity and the strength of our great democracy. I spend a lot of time talking about the transformational power of liberty, reminding people that liberty has got an incredible way of taking diverse people and uniting them into one common purpose -- pais, a great land. That's why we believe democracy has a place in our own neighborhood. We believe that liberty is important in countries throughout our hemisphere. We believe in human dignity and human rights, the non-negotiable demands of human dignity. And that's achieved through liberty.That's why we're working to advance liberty in the greater Middle East. We believe all people desire to be free. We believe that inherently in the soul of men and women is this desire to live in free societies. It's worked here in America; it can work everywhere. Think about our country. We're such a diverse land, with different cultures all bound together in this great country because of freedom.You know, recently I talked to President Putin of Russia. I told him this country mourns the loss of life as a result of the terrorist attacks, the terrorist attack on the school. I told him we stand shoulder-to-shoulder with them in fighting terror, that we abhor men who kill innocent children to try to achieve a dark vision. I'm also concerned about the decisions that are being made in Russia that could undermine democracy in Russia; that great countries, great democracies have a balance of power between central government and local governments, a balance of power within central governments between the executive branch and the legislative branch and the judicial branch. As governments fight the enemies of democracy, they must uphold the principles of democracy.I also want to say something as we gather about Hurricane Ivan. I talked to the governors of Mississippi and Alabama and Louisiana, tambien mi hermano, el gobernador de Florida. I told him the people of this country -- I told all four governors the people of this country are praying for their safety. We pray that the storm passes as quickly as possible, without any loss of life or loss of property, and that, I told them, that the government is ready to help.I appreciate Hector. I want to thank you for your service. I appreciate Secretary Evans and Secretary Chao, members of my Cabinet who have joined us today. I'm proud of your work. Have we got ambassadors here? This is an important month, by the way, and we're tracking a lot of big shots. (Laughter.) Hans Hertell is with us. Hans, thanks for coming. He's the ambassador to the Dominican Republic, mi amigo. Gaddi Vasquez, the Director of the Peace Corps; Roger Noriega Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs. Eduardo Aguirre is the Director of the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. Al Gonzales is my lawyer. (Laughter.) He is the White House Counsel to the President. Ruben Barrales is the Director of Intergovernmental Affairs. I'm naming people that work in my administration. I think it's important to promote a diverse administration, to welcome all cultures. And we're better for it here in Washington. And I want to thank them for their service.President George W. Bush discusses the achievements of Hispanic Americans during a celebration of Hispanic Heritage Month in the East Room of the White House Wednesday, Sept. 15, 2004. White House photo by Joyce Naltchayan. I want to thank Embajador de Colombia, tambien de Mexico, y el nuevo Embajador de Espana. Welcome today to the White House for the credentialing ceremony. I want to thank the three ambassadors for coming. Welcome. Bienvenidos. I want to thank the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee for the United States Senate, Chairman Lugar. Great man. Senator Lugar from the great state of Indiana. I also appreciate Congressmen Weller, Diaz-Balart de Florida, y tambien Steve Pearce from New Mexico. Thank you all for coming. Proud you're here.Brian Sandoval, donde esta? Anyway, he's here somewhere. He got a lousy seat. (Laughter.) Or no seat at all. (Laughter.) Marcos, thanks for your prayers. Beautiful. Welcome. Tell everybody at home hello. That would be Houston, is where he lives. And Laura and I are Texanos.I want to thank -- Joaquin, thank you very much. It was a spectacular performance. What a great athlete, and an artist. (Applause.) Thank you guys. Your buddies brought out the best in you. It was really great. Thanks. Myrka, thanks for coming. Gracias.I want to thank Israel. Appreciate you coming. El amigo de familia, Gustavo Cisneros. Gracias, Gustovo, welcome. Jimmy, thanks for coming. Jimmy Smits. Proud you're here. Elizabeth Vargas is with us. I'm proud she is here. I want to thank Alex Wallau from ABC Television, for coming with us. Eliseo -- we got some soccer stars? Where are they? Donde esta los soccer stars? They're somewhere. Oh, there they are, yes. The three stars. (Applause.) Eliseo, Marco, y Amado. Thank you for coming. (Applause.) So how is the team this year, pretty good? Yes? No hablas Ingles. (Laughter.) Eliseo is from El Salvador. Marco, que pais? Bolivia. Amado is from Honduras. Bienvenidos. Good luck in the season.I want to thank members of the Hispanic Organization who are here today.I do want to make special mention of the fact that Judge Reynaldo Garza, Brownsville, Texas, passed away this week. He's 89 years old. In 1961, President Kennedy appointed Judge Garza to the district court in Texas. Judge Garza was one of the first Hispanic federal judges in America. He's a great Texan. Those of us who are from Texas were proud to say we're both Texans. He was the son of Mexican immigrants. He was a shining example of the American Dream. He was a good man and he made this country a better place. And we honor his memory today.People often talk about the Latino culture. Here's how I like to describe it: faith in God, commitment to family, and love of country. In this moment in our history, America is defending -- depending on the unselfish dedication of patriots. Today there are almost 200,000 Hispanic Americans serving in the Armed Forces. Eight of these incredibly brave men and women are with us today. I want to thank you all for coming. Thank you for wearing the uniform. (Applause.)Latinos have contributed to defense of freedom abroad and to the advance of freedom inside our own country. This afternoon, Laura and I were honored to meet members of an Hispanic-American family who struggled against discrimination and won a victory for all in this country. We welcome Sylvia and Gonzalo and Jerome and Sandra Mendez with us. Bienvenidos. Let me tell you their story. I think you'll find it so incredibly American and so uplifting.Sixty years ago, their parents, Gonzalo y Felicitas Mendez, tried to enroll their children as students in a mostly white elementary school closest to their house in Westminister, California. That was 60 years ago. Unfortunately, in those days, America had a -- our vision wasn't as clear as it should be. They were turned away from that school and they went to an older barrio school. I'm told it was a rickety, wooden building bordered by an electric cattle fence. The mom and dad didn't like it, they didn't like their children being treated that way. They love their children. And so they -- and so the dad saved his money, 1945, and he went into a federal court to sue with four other families for equality and fairness. That's 1945.He said, ""I'm just doing this for my children."" What he really meant to say was, I'm just doing this for every child. He was fighting so that everyone in this country has a chance to realize the American Dream.A lawyer named Thurgood Marshall filed a friend of the court brief in the lawsuit, and the Mendez family won their case. Their effects reached far beyond a single neighborhood school. Inspired by the Mendez decision, Governor Earl Warren signed an order desegregating all the schools of California. Five years later, Thurgood Marshall would use the same arguments against segregation when he argued Brown versus Board of Education. And Earl Warren, who had become Chief Justice, would write the Supreme Court opinion that ended segregation in schools across America.Today we honor your family, and your mom and dad. (Applause.)When Laura and I were taking our picture, one of the beautiful girls said -- women said -- the No Child Left Behind Act is great. It's in the spirit of the Mendez family that the No Child Left Behind Act is flourishing, because we're fighting against another kind of discrimination in that act. It's called the soft bigotry of low expectations. We should never allow a system to exist in where they walk into a classroom and say, this child can't read because of the color of their skin. You can't condemn somebody to failure because their parents don't speak English as a first language. That's not what we stand for her in America.And so the laws we passed with Republican and Democrat help are challenging that soft bigotry of low expectation. We believe every child can learn. We want to know if every child can read and write and add and subtract, early before it's too late. We're going to stop this business about just shuffling children through the school year after year without learning the basics. We'll correct problems now. We're raising the bar. No dejamos a ninguno nino atras. No child will be left behind in America. (Applause.)Recently I talked about a school in Georgia, northeast Georgia, called Gainesville Elementary School. It's mostly Hispanic, mostly poor. It's the kind of school where people just say, well, gosh, these kids can't learn, give up, move them through. This year, 90 percent of the students passed the state tests in reading and math. That's a fantastic statistic, isn't it? (Applause.)We wouldn't know if we didn't measure. We wouldn't know if we didn't ask the questions about whether a child can read and write and add and subtract. We wouldn't know if we didn't correct problems early, before they're too late. And fortunately, the school has got a principal that has challenged the soft bigotry of low expectations. Here's what she said: ""We don't focus on what we can't do at this school, we focus on what we can do. We do whatever it takes to get the kids across the finish line.""That's what we're going to do here in this country. As we celebrate this important month, our mission, our goal, our deepest desire is for every child -- every child -- including those whose parents don't speak English as a first language, to be able to realize the promise of this country by making sure the public schools have high standards in excellence in every classroom. And that's what we're going to do. (Applause.)As we celebrate this important month, we also need to celebrate ownership, because that's part of the American experience. We want more people owning their own home. I think there's nothing better than people opening up the door where they live and saying, welcome to my home. Bienvenidos a mi casa. (Laughter.) Thanks for coming to my piece of property. And we must be dedicated to the proposition that ownership ought to extend to every neighborhood and every group.I set a goal to have 5.5 million new minority homeowners by the end of this decade. And we're on track to meet the goal -- 1.6 million new minority homeowners bought homes in the last two years. It's a fantastic statistic, I think. I think it's part of helping bring hope into people's families.Also I'd like to talk about entrepreneurship. I mean, the Latino community is entrepreneurial. I mean, you talk about small business owners who have got vision and drive and desire, sit down with Latino business owners. They have a great sense of business and balance sheet and, as importantly, a great desire to own their own business. And one of the most hopeful aspects of our society today is the number of Hispanic-owned businesses that thrive throughout America. I love it when I meet an Hispanic entrepreneur, particularly somebody who came up with an idea at their kitchen table, and said, I want to own something, I want to own my business. And now they're employing people. Seventy percent of new jobs in America are created by small businesses. Think about that. And the role of government is to encourage the expansion of small business opportunity and entrepreneurship through every society, every part of our society. And we're doing just that in America. And our country is better for it.Listen, we're a diverse nation, but there are things that bind us -- our love of freedom, our belief in God, our understanding of the importance of family, our desire to realize dreams, the deep desire for people to live in a free society. I'm proud of your heritage. I'm proud of the ancestry. I'm proud to call Latinos Americans, and I'm proud to be your President. God bless, and welcome to the White House. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all. Thanks for the warm welcome. I am glad to join you here in Nevada. I'm also honored to be up here with the Governor. He said to remind you of an important thing here. He said, what happens in Vegas -- (laughter) -- stays in Vegas. (Laughter and applause.) I hope you've enjoyed yourself in this fantastic part of our country. I'm honored to be invited to the 126th national conference. It's a pleasure to be with the brave men and  women of the National Guard.As the General just said, you've had many famous Americans in your ranks, including men named Jefferson, Madison, Lincoln and Truman. Nineteen individuals have served both in the Guard and as President of the United States, and I am proud to be one of them. (Applause.)The men and women -- the men and women of the National Guard are deployed around the world today, fighting the forces of terror in Afghanistan and Iraq, and helping Americans threatened with natural disasters, like hurricanes here at home. I am proud to be their Commander-in-Chief, and I respect and honor all of those who serve in the United States Armed Forces -- active, Guard, and Reserve. (Applause.)I want to thank General Hargett for his leadership. I appreciate your for your invitation. I want to thank the Governor. I want to thank the Lieutenant Governor. I want to thank the Attorney General, Brian Sandoval. I want to thank the Secretary of State, Dean Heller, for joining us today. It's a pretty important group when you get that many politicians here in one room. (Laughter.) I thank General Blum, General Harrison. I thank my fellow Texan, Danny James, General James. (Applause.) General Schultz. I want to thank the leadership and convention delegates. Most of all, thank you for inviting me today.When I landed, by the way, at the airport, I had the honor of meeting Theresa Bunker. She is a volunteer with the Las Vegas National Guard Family Support Center. I met her brave son -- he just came back from Iraq. I like to tell people the strength of this country is in the hearts and souls of our citizens -- people like Theresa, who have taken time out of her life to volunteer, provide support for family members, to send care packages overseas. No, we're going to keep our military strong -- but never forget, the strength of this country are the great citizens of America who serve this country one heart and one soul at a time. (Applause.)The Guard has been fighting for America since before America was a nation. From its birth in the 1630s, the Guard protected the early colonists and helped win the War on Independence. Today, each of you carries on the great tradition of those early citizen-soldiers, who picked up muskets to defend our freedom. Weapons have changed, and so have our enemies, but one thing remains the same: The men and women of the Guard stand ready to put on the uniform and fight for America. Our country is stronger, our freedom more secure because each of you has volunteered to serve. (Applause.)You have taken an oath to stand by America in times of crisis, war and emergency. You're fulfilling that oath in many ways. Across the state of Florida -- I happen to know the Commander-in-Chief of the Guard there -- (laughter) -- thousands of Guard members have mobilized in response to Hurricanes Charley and Frances. They are helping to control traffic, provide security, conduct search and rescue operations, and distribute food and water. One resident of Punta Gorda, Florida put it, ""I don't know what this town would have done without the National Guard."" When tragedy strikes, Americans can always count on the Guard. (Applause.)When tragedy came on September the 11th, 2001, the response of the Guard was outstanding. A thousand Guard volunteers came forward to help that day, and by sunrise on September the 12th, more than 5,000 Guard volunteers were on the job. In the past three years, Guard units have defended the American homeland against further attack ?- you've taken the battle to our enemies abroad. The National Guard has played a critical role in every aspect of Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. More than 185,000 Guard members have been called up to serve on every front in the war on terror. You are a vital part of our strategy to defend America. You're fighting terrorist enemies in Iraq and Afghanistan, and across the globe, so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.) America is safer because of your service, and we are grateful. (Applause.)And we are grateful for your families, who share in your sacrifice. There are few things more difficult in life than seeing a loved one go off to war. When the call to duty comes, your families miss you and they worry about you. By standing behind you, they also serve our country. America is grateful for the service and sacrifice of our Guard families. (Applause.)Your service would not be possible without the understanding and support of your employers. In offices, and schools, and factories, and hospitals across this country, businesses do without your talents so that you can serve our nation. Employers across this country are supporting the Guard, because they know the -- because they know the stakes in this war are high. These companies are showing their patriotism, and they, too, have the gratitude of our country. (Applause.)I know this time of call-ups, and alerts, and mobilizations, and deployments has been difficult for Guard members and their families and employers. And when our nation must call on you, we owe you some things in return. We're working to provide you at least 30 days notification before you're mobilized, so you have time to make arrangements. We're working to give you as much certainty as possible about the length of your mobilization -- you deserve to know when you can expect to resume civilian life. We're working to minimize the number of extensions and repeat mobilizations, by moving forces out of low-demand specialties, such as heavy artillery, and increasing the number of available troops with skills that are in high-demand -- such as military police, civil affairs, and special operations.We're improving benefits and the quality of life for our nation's citizen-soldiers. My administration has spent almost $14 billion for construction, maintenance and support for Guard and Reserve facilities across the United States. We have expanded health care benefits for Guard and Reserve forces and their family members, giving them access to the military's TRICARE system for up to 90 days before they report and 180 days after deactivation -- and I will ask Congress to make that expansion permanent. (Applause.)I called upon Congress to increase the monthly educational benefit for Guard and Reserve forces mobilized for more than 90 days in the war on terror by 40 to 80 percent, depending on the length of their mobilization. Congress must pass this piece of legislation. (Applause.) This administration stands for the Guard and its family. And we do so because we need the service of Guardsmen and women, because of the times we live in. These are dangerous times. My most solemn duty as the President is to protect the American people. If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This is not going to happen on my watch. (Applause.)Since that terrible morning three years ago, America has been at war. We fought the terrorists across the earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. Our strategy is clear: we're defending the homeland, we're transforming our military, we're strengthening our intelligence services. We're staying on the offensive. We will strike the terrorists abroad so they can't come here and hurt us. (Applause.) We will advance liberty in the broader Middle East and around the world, because freedom will bring a future of hope and peace we all long for. And we will prevail. (Applause.)Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda, Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups, Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising, Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons, Iraq was a gathering threat, and al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we acted, the government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror, Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders, Saudi is making raids and arrests, Libya is dismantling its weapons programs, the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been detained or killed. (Applause.) We have led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)All this progress involved careful diplomacy, clear moral purpose, and some tough decisions. And the toughest came on Iraq. We knew Saddam Hussein's record of aggression and support for terror. Remember, he housed Abu Nidal -- he's the guy that killed Leon Klinghoffer -- housed him and his associates. Zarqawi was in and out of Baghdad. He's the fellow who cuts people's heads off and hopes we cringe and shirk our duty. Saddam paid the families of suicide bombers. We knew his long history of pursuing, and even using, weapons of mass destruction. And we know that after September the 11th, our country must think differently. We must take threats seriously, before they fully materialize. (Applause.)In Saddam Hussein, we saw a threat. So I went to the United States Congress. Members of both political parties -- including my opponent and his running mate -- looked at the same intelligence, remembered the same history we remembered, and concluded that Saddam Hussein was a threat and they authorized the use of force. Before the Commander-in-Chief commits troops into harm's way, we must try all avenues to deal with the threat. I was hopeful that diplomacy would work, that why I went to the United Nations.The U.N. Security Council looked at the same intelligence we looked at, remembered the same history we remembered, and came to this conclusion. They said to Saddam Hussein by a 15 to nothing vote in the U.N. Security Council: disclose, disarm or face serious consequences. As he had for over a decade, Saddam Hussein ignored the demands of the world. Matter of fact, when they sent inspectors into his country, he systematically deceived them. It was clear to me diplomacy wasn't working. So I had a choice to make: Do I forget the lessons of September the 11th and take the word of a madman -- or take action necessary to defend America? Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)Because we acted -- because we acted to defend our country, more than 50 million people in Afghanistan and Iraq are free. It wasn't all that long ago that many young girls weren't allowed to go to school in Afghanistan, because of the dark vision of the Taliban. Wasn't all that long ago that the moms were taken to a sports stadium and executed because they wouldn't toe the line of these barbaric people.And today, over 10 million Afghanistan citizens -- 41 percent of whom are women -- are registered to vote in the upcoming presidential elections. (Applause.) Despite ongoing violence in Iraq, that country now has a strong Prime Minister, a national council, and national elections are scheduled in January. The world is changing for the better. Our nation is standing with the people of Afghanistan and Iraq, because when America gives its word, America must keep its word. (Applause.)We're also serving a vital and historic cause that'll make our country safer. Free societies in the Middle East will be hopeful societies, which no longer feed resentments and breed violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight terrorists instead of harboring them, and that helps us keep the peace. So our mission in Afghanistan and Iraq is clear: We'll help new leaders to train their armies, move toward elections, and get on the path of stability and democracy as quickly as possible. And then our troops will return home with the honor they deserve. (Applause.)I have made a pledge to those who wear the uniform that they will have the resources and the tools they need to do their jobs. That's why I went to the United States Congress last September and requested $87 billion for vital funding -- funding for our troops in harm's way, funding for those who wear the uniform of America in Afghanistan and Iraq. I was pleased with the overwhelming bipartisan support for this important funding request. Matter of fact, the support was so strong, that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against it. Two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.They asked him why and he said: Well, I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it. Then they said, well, they pressed him for it, he said he was proud of his vote. And finally he said the whole thing was a complicated matter. There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)Last week -- last week my opponent questioned the cost of our operations in Iraq, and said the money could have been better spent elsewhere. The problem is, just last summer he had a completely different view. Asked whether he believed we should reduce funding for operations in Iraq, my opponent at the time replied: No. I think we should increase it. Asked by how much, he said: By whatever number of billion dollars it takes to win; it is critical that the United States of America be successful in Iraq.What's critical is that the President of the United States speak clearly and consistently at this time of great threat in our world, and not change positions because of expediency or pressure. Our troops, our friends and allies, and our enemies must know where America stands -- and that America will stand firm. (Applause.) We cannot waver -- we cannot waver because our enemies will not waver. As we saw with such horror on September the 11th, as the people of Russia saw in the terrible massacre of innocent children there, we are up against people who show no shame, no remorse, no hint of humanity -- and we must confront them clearly and consistently -- not just some of the time, but all of the time. (Applause.)Our troops understand the importance of our mission. Sergeant Bob Kells returned from Iraq a few months ago, where he was deployed with the Rhode Island National Guard. ""We saw what [Saddam Hussein] did to these people,"" he says. ""We saw the graves. The people would lead us to them. [Now] they're free. They never had that before. And we did it for them."" He says of the insurgents and terrorists we are fighting in Iraq today, ""they want us out. But they're a minority. The Iraqi people want democracy. The [insurgents] are absolute cowards. They fight behind women and children -- but better fighting them there, than over here.""Sergeant Kells is correct. Our mission in Iraq is critical. And our men and women in uniform -- active, Guard, and Reserve -- are doing a superb job for America. (Applause.) Because of your service and sacrifice, we're defeating the terrorists where they live, and that makes us safer. Because of you, women in Afghanistan are no longer shot and whipped in public. Because of you, the people of Iraq no longer fear being executed and left in mass graves. Because of you, the world is more just and more peaceful. (Applause.)Others are helping us. We put together alliance to help us in the cause of freedom and peace. There's nearly 40 nations involved in Afghanistan, and some 30 nations involved in Iraq. I'll continue to work with our allies and friends, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. The wisest use of American strength is to advance freedom. One of the people with whom I've spent a lot of time is Prime Minister Koizumi, of Japan. We're friends. We talk a lot. It's amazing, though, to be having these discussions with Prime Minister Koizumi, because it wasn't all that long ago in the march of history that we were at war with Japan. They were a sworn enemy. My dad, I suspect others' dads and granddads fought against the Japanese.But because of people like Harry Truman and other Americans, after World War II, people who understood that liberty could transform an enemy into an ally, because they doubted -- they overcame the doubters, because they worked to build a democracy in Japan, today I sit down at the table with Prime Minister Koizumi, talking about the peace. Liberty is powerful. Liberty can change nations. Some day, an American President will be sitting down with a duly elected leader of Iraq, talking about the peace and our children and grandchildren will be better off for it. (Applause.)I believe that millions in the Middle East plead in silence for their liberty. I believe that if given the chance, they will embrace the most honorable form of government ever devised by man. I believe this because freedom is not America's gift to the world -- freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation, when little is expected of leaders. This isn't one of those times. This is a time when we need firm resolve, clear vision, and deep faith in the values that make us a great nation.None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. Three years ago today, on September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I'll never forget. There were workers in hard hats there yelling at me at the top of their lungs: Whatever it takes. I was trying to do my best to console and thank the rescuers. A guy grabbed me by the arm, he looks me straight in the eye and he says: Do not let me down. I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect America. I will never relent in defending our country, whatever it takes. (Applause.)And I know -- and I know that is your commitment, as well. You've shown it by your commitment to service, your standards of honor and your performance of duty. America's citizen soldiers reflect great credit on our military, and on our country. And I am here to thank you for your service.May God bless you, and may God continue to bless the United States of America. (Applause.)"
bush,2008,"Thank you all very much for coming. Nothing like a little Dutch hospitality on the campaign trail.  (Applause.)I'm here to ask for your vote, that's what I'm doing today. (Applause.) I believe you've got to get out amongst the people and ask for the vote. And not only do I want your vote, I want your help. (Applause.) Go out and register your friends and neighbors to vote. Don't overlook the discerning Democrat. (Applause.) People like Zell Miller. (Applause.) And then when you register them to vote, get them headed to the polls. Then when you get them headed to the polls, tell them if you want a safer America, a stronger America, a better America, put Dick Cheney and me back in office. (Applause.)I wish Laura were here today. (Applause.) She is a great mom, a wonderful wife. I'm going to give you some reasons to put me back in, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Listen, I'm real proud to be -- I'm proud to be running with my friend, Dick Cheney. Look, I admit it, he doesn't have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) I didn't pick him because of his hair. I picked him because he's a man of good judgment, good experience, a man who gets the job done. (Applause.)I want to thank my friend, Pete Hoekstra, and his wife, Diane. (Applause.) Hoekstra is a good one, a fine member of the United States Congress. I look forward to working -- he said when we were coming in on the bus, he said, remind them we worked on the desks together. (Laughter.) I did. They put him the head of the Intelligence Committee. (Applause.) Believe me, that's a big deal. I'm looking forward to working with him to make sure we've got the best intelligence possible to protect our country. (Applause.)I want to thank the Mayor for being here. Mr. Mayor -- Mayor Al is with us today. I appreciate him coming. Just fill the potholes, Mr. Mayor, and everything will be fine. (Laughter and applause.) I appreciate, Mayor -- tell your police force how much we appreciate their sacrifice and service. And while you're thanking the police, thank those firefighters, too, for their service. (Applause.)And I want to thank my friend, Betsy DeVos, and her father-in-law, Rich. I want to thank all the grassroots activists who are here. (Applause.) Those are the people who put up the signs and make the phone calls. Thank the local officials who are here. I thank the Bellamy Brothers who are here -- my friends, the Bellamy Brothers. Good to see you guys; thank you for coming. (Applause.) I want to thank the Holland Public High marching band for coming today. (Applause.) Make sure you hustle back to class and start studying. (Laughter.)Here's what I believe. I believe with your help, we will carry Michigan and win a great victory in November. (Applause.) I'm looking forward to campaigning in your state. I'm looking forward to spending a lot of time here. I'm going to tell the people where I stand, what I believe, and where I'm going to lead this nation for the next four years. (Applause.)I believe every child can learn and every school must teach. (Applause.) I went to Washington to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations, to raise the standards, to measure early and solve problems before it's too late. I went to stop this practice of just shuffling children through the schools grade after grade, year after year, without learning the basics. (Applause.) I went to make sure Washington trusts the local people to make the right decisions for their schools. We're closing the achievement gap in America, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)I believe we have a moral responsibility to provide our seniors with good health care. (Applause.) I knew Medicare was an important program, but it wasn't changing with the times. See, we pay $100,000 for heart surgery, but not the prescription drugs to prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. (Applause.) That didn't make any sense for our seniors. It didn't make any sense for our taxpayers. We've strengthened Medicare, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)I believe in the energy, innovation, and spirit of America's workers and farmers and small business owners. And that's why we unleashed that energy with the largest tax relief in a generation. (Applause.)When you're out rounding up the vote you remind your friends and neighbors what this economy has been through; we have been through a recession, we've been through corporate scandals -- by the way, we passed new laws and it's now clear, abundantly clear, that we're not going to tolerate dishonesty in the board rooms of America. (Applause.)And we went through that terror attack. And that attack hurt our economy. But we're overcoming those obstacles. Our economy has been growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. We're overcoming those obstacles because we've got great workers and great farmers. We're overcoming those obstacles because the tax relief is working. (Applause.)The national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent. That is lower than the average rate of the 1970s, the 1980s and the 1990s. (Applause.) Listen, there are some areas of our country that are still lagging behind, but we'll continue to promote a pro-growth, pro-small business policy, pro-entrepreneur policy for the next four years so people can find a good job here in America. (Applause.)I believe a President -- I believe it's a job of a President to confront problems, not pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. I believe the most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This is not going to happen on my watch. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: I am running for President with a clear and positive plan to build a safer world and a more hopeful America. I am running with a compassionate conservative philosophy that government should help people improve their lives, not try to run their lives. I believe this nation wants steady, consistent, principled leadership and that's why, with your help, we're going to win a great national victory in November. (Applause.)Listen, I understand the world we live in today is a changing world. Think about what happened in the workplace. Years ago our fathers and grandfathers worked for one job, one company; they had one pension plan, one health care plan; today people change careers and change jobs often. And the most startling change of all is that women now work not only in the house but outside the house. (Applause.)We have a changing world. And, yet, the fundamental systems haven't changed: the tax code, health coverage, pension plans, worker training were created for the world of yesterday, not tomorrow. So over the next four years we're going to transform these systems so that all citizens are equipped, prepared and, thus, truly free to be able to make their own choices and to be able to realize the great promise of this country. (Applause.)Listen, any hopeful society has got to be one in which the economy is growing, and I've laid out a plan to make sure that this economy of ours continues to grow. To keep jobs here in America, America must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.) That means less regulations and less lawsuits on our small business owners. (Applause.)Listen, to keep jobs here in America, we need an energy plan. I submitted a plan to the United States Congress, and it's stuck in there. It's a plan that encourages conservation, encourages the use of renewables, encourages clean coal technology, encourages the use of technology to make sure we explore for hydrocarbons in environmentally friendly ways -- but it's a plan that recognizes to keep jobs here, we need to be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.) To keep jobs here, we've got to be wise about how we use our natural resources, including water. And that starts with keeping the Great Lakes water in the Great Lakes Basin. (Applause.)See, earlier this year, my opponent said a decision about Great Lakes water diversion would be a delicate balancing act.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That kind of sounds like him, doesn't it? (Applause.) My position is clear: my administration will never allow the diversion of Great Lakes water. (Applause.)Listen, to keep jobs here, we've got to make sure we open up foreign markets to our products. See, if we open up markets -- we open up our market, it's good for you we do. See, the economy works this way: if you have more choices in the marketplace, you're likely to get the product you want at a better price and higher quality. So what I'm telling the places like China is you treat us the way we treat you. And the reason I'm saying that is I know we can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere if the rules are fair. (Applause.)To create jobs here in America, to make sure this economy continues to grow we've got to be wise about how we spend your money, and we've got to keep your taxes low. (Applause.) Taxes are an issue in this campaign. I'm running against a fellow who's promised at least $2 trillion in new money so far.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And we haven't even gotten in the stretch run yet. So I said to him the other day, well, how are you going to pay for them? And he said, that's easy, just tax the rich.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: We've heard that before, haven't we? First of all, you can't raise enough money by taxing the rich to cover his $2.2 trillion of new spending. There is a tax gap. Guess what he's thinking? Guess who he thinks is going to fill the tax gap when he can't make it with the rich? Yes.Let me tell you what else -- you've heard that I'm going the tax the rich before, haven't you? That's why the rich hire accountants and lawyers so you get stuck with the bill. But we're not going to let him tax you. We're going to win in November. (Applause.)Let me tell you something else we've got to do about this tax code: we've got to change it. It's a complicated mess. It's full of special-interest loopholes. In a new term I'm going to bring the Republicans and Democrats together to simplify the tax code, to make the tax code more fair. (Applause.) We want more people working than spending time -- than the time they have to spend on filling out all these forms. Do you realize Americans spend about 6 billion hours a year on federal taxes. That's one complicated code that needs to be fixed and will be fixed. (Applause.)In a changing world we've got to recognize, we've got to help our workers gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. Jobs are changing, sometimes the skill sets aren't. That's why I'm such a big believer in the community college system around America. I also understand that most new jobs are filled by people with at least two years of college. Yet, only one in four of our students gets there. That's why in high schools we'll fund early intervention programs to help students at risk. We must place a new focus on math and science. Over time, we will require rigorous exam before graduation. By raising performance standards in high school, by expanding Pell Grants for low and middle-income families we will help more Americans start their career with a college diploma. (Applause.)Times have changed, we've got to do more to make sure healthcare is available and affordable. More than half of the uninsured in America are small business employees and their families. Small businesses are having trouble affording health care. In order to help the families who work for these companies, we must allow small firms to join together so they can purchase insurance at the discounts available to big companies. (Applause.)We want people owning and managing their own health plans, and that's why I believe we ought to expand health savings accounts. I want to expand community health centers so poor people can find good health care all across America, particularly in our poor counties.I know in order to make sure we've got good docs practicing medicine, to make sure health care is affordable, we need to stop these junk lawsuits. (Applause.) You cannot be pro-doctor, pro-patient, pro-hospital, and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice: I'm for medical liability reform now. (Applause.)Our plan to improve the quality of health care is practical, it's a commonsense plan to make health care more accessible, more affordable, and to keep the good docs practicing medicine. I believe that health care decisions should be made by doctors and patients, not by Washington, D.C. bureaucrats. (Applause.)We have a difference of opinion in this campaign. I'm running against a fellow who's put out a health care plan that is massive, it is complicated, it is a blueprint to have the government control your health care.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And he can't pay for his plan. Today, there's an independent study out that says his health care plan today would cost taxpayers $1.5 trillion new dollars.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: That's just the kind of plan you would expect from a senator from Massachusetts. (Applause.)In a new term, I'll continue to promote an ownership society in America. In changing times, ownership can bring stability to your lives. One of the great statistics of the modern -- of the modern -- of the last couple of years, is the home ownership rate is at an all-time high in America. (Applause.) We've got a plan to continue home ownership in America. I love the fact, when people from all walks of life can open up their door where they're living and say, welcome to my home, welcome to my piece of property. (Applause.)We need -- we need to -- listen. On Social Security, we need to -- I want the younger workers here to listen carefully to this debate on Social Security. If you're -- if you're on Social Security today, nothing is going to change. I do not care what the D.C. politicians will tell you. Nobody is going to take away your benefits. And if you're a baby boomer, you're in pretty good shape when it comes to Social Security. (Applause.)But we need to worry about our children and grandchildren, when it comes to the Social Security system. (Applause.) I think we need to think differently when it comes to our children and grandchildren. I think we ought to allow young workers to put aside some of their own tax money in a personal savings account, to make sure Social Security fulfills the promise. (Applause.)If you listen carefully to the rhetoric in this campaign, I'm running against a fellow who wants to expand government. We want to expand opportunity for every single citizen of this country. (Applause.)I also recognize, in the world of change, some things do not change. The values we try to live by do not change: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In times of change, we'll support the institutions that gives our lives direction and purpose: our families, our schools, our religious congregations. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person counts and every being matters. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of society. (Applause.) And I stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. Since the terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth, not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. (Applause.) Our strategy is clear. We're defending the homeland, transforming our military, and strengthening our intelligence services. We're staying on the offensive. We are striking the terrorists abroad, so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We will work to advance liberty in the broader Middle East and throughout the world and we will prevail. (Applause.) Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaeda. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a gathering threat, and Al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks.Because we acted, because we led the government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror, Pakistan is capturing terrorists, Saudi is making raids and arrests, Libya is dismantling its weapons programs, the army of Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's known leadership has been brought to justice. (Applause.)We have led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer. This progress involved careful diplomacy, clear moral purpose, and some tough decisions. And the toughest came on Iraq. We knew Saddam Hussein's record of aggression and support for terror. We knew his long history of pursuing, even using, weapons of mass destruction. And we know that after September the 11th, our country must think differently. We must take threats seriously before they fully materialize. (Applause.)In Saddam Hussein we saw a threat. I went to the United States Congress and members of both political parties, including my opponent, looked at the same intelligence, remembered the same history, and recognized Saddam Hussein was a threat. They voted the authorization of force. They said, go ahead and use force if you need to; he's a threat. Before the Commander-in-Chief commits troops into harm's way, we must have tried all alternatives. That's why I went to the United Nations. I was hopeful that diplomacy could deal with this threat. I was hopeful diplomacy would work.The United Nations looked at the same intelligence I did, they remembered the same history we remembered, and voted 15 to nothing to say to Saddam Hussein: disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences. (Applause.)The world spoke, but as he had for over a decade, he ignored the resolutions of the United Nations. He wasn't about to listen to the demands of the free world. As a matter of fact, when the U.N. sent inspectors into find the truth, he systematically deceived them. So at this point, I have a choice to make. I have a decision to make. The decision only comes to the Oval Office, a decision no President wants to make, but must be -- must be prepared to make, and that is: Do I trust the word of a madman, forget the lessons of September the 11th -- or take action to defend this country? Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: Because we acted -- because we acted to defend ourself, more than 50 million people are now free. (Applause.) That makes the world more peaceful. Think about Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago that young girls weren't allowed to go to school, and their mothers got whipped in the public square because they didn't toe the line of the Taliban. These people were barbaric people. They had hijacked a good religion, and converted it into an ideology of hate. Today, in Afghanistan, more than 10 million people, 40 percent of whom are women, have registered to vote in the upcoming presidential election. (Applause.)Despite ongoing acts of violence, Iraq now has a strong Prime Minister, a national council, and national elections are scheduled in January. (Applause.) We're standing with the people in those countries, because when America gives its word, America must keep its word. (Applause.) And by standing with them, we're also serving a vital and historic cause that will make our country safer. See, free societies in the Middle East will be hopeful societies, which no longer feed resentments or breed violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight terrorists, instead of harboring them, and that helps us keep us safe.So our mission in Afghanistan and Iraq is clear: We will help the new leaders train their police and their armies, so the people of Afghanistan and Iraq can do the hard work of defending freedom. (Applause.) We will help them -- we will help them move toward elections, we'll get them on the path of stability and democracy as quickly as possible, and then our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)We've got a great United States military, people like Lance Corporal Russell Bullock who's with us today. (Applause.) I've had the honor of meeting people like Russell, men and women who wear our uniform. I've seen their great decency and unselfish courage. I want to thank the veterans who are with us today for having set such a great example. (Applause.)And I believe the government has a commitment, has an obligation to those who wear our uniform. They must have all the resources they need to complete their missions. That's why a year ago I went to the United States Congress and proposed $87 billion of supplemental funding to support our troops in combat in both Iraq and Afghanistan. (Applause.) It was a very important piece of legislation. As a matter of fact, most members of the United States Congress understood its importance. We had great bipartisan support for this request -- so strong that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against it -- two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: When you're out gathering the vote, when you're out convincing people to go to the polls, remind them that only four United States Senators voted to authorize the use of force and then voted against funding our troops, and two of those four are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: They said, Why did you do that? And he said, well, I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it. Now, I know Holland, Michigan well enough to know not many people talk like that around here. (Laughter.) And they kept pressing him. They kept pressing him. He said he was proud of his own -- he finally just said, the whole thing is a complicated matter.There is nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)The Commander-in-Chief must have clear vision and mean what he says when he speaks. When it comes to Iraq, my opponent has more different positions than all his colleagues in the Senate combined. Senator Kerry once said it would be naive, to the point of grave danger, not to believe that left to his own devices Saddam Hussein will provoke, misjudge, or stumble into a future, more dangerous confrontation with the civilized world. Then, in 2002 he voted for the war, but then voted against funding for our troops. When the heat got on in his Democrat primary he declared himself the anti-war candidate. Then, later -- earlier this summer he said he would have still voted to go to war even knowing everything we know today. Then about 10 days ago he adopted the language of his one-time rival, Howard Dean, saying it was the wrong war at the wrong time -- even though he said earlier it was the right decision and he supported it. (Laughter.)Here's the latest wrinkle. Here's the latest wrinkle -- I'm trying to figure out what he believes. He said: we're spending too much money in Iraq -- even though he earlier criticized me for not spending enough. One thing about his position is clear, if he had had his way, Saddam Hussein would still be in power and would be a threat to our security and peace in the world.Listen, I want to thank our friends and neighbors -- friends and allies for their contributions. I've spent a lot of time doing that. I appreciate the fact -- we've got nearly 40 nations involved in Afghanistan, some 30 nations involved in Iraq helping us to spread freedom and peace. But I will never -- as I build coalitions over the next four years, as I continue to work with friends and neighbors I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. I believe the wisest use of American strength is freedom.I like to share stories of my time with different leaders around the world, and one of them is -- one of the leaders I admire a lot is Prime Minister Koizumi, of Japan. Think about that -- one of the people with whom I have good relations is the leader of a country that my dad was at war with -- your dads or granddads, husbands, grandfathers were at war with them. We had a bloody war with Japan, a violent war.So World War II was over, after we had won. My predecessor, Harry Truman, and other Americans believed that liberty could transform enemies into allies. They stood the line. There was a lot of skepticism during those times. But they stood strong for the values that we believe in. And as a result of helping Japan become a democracy, today I sit down at the table with Prime Minister Koizumi talking about the peace, talking about how to make the world a more hopeful place, talking about working together to spread the peace we all yearn for. (Applause.) Someday, an American President will be sitting down with a duly elected leader of Iraq talking about the peace. And our children and grandchildren will be able to grow up in a much better world. (Applause.)And I believe -- I believe that millions in the Middle East want to be free. I believe women in the Middle East long for a day of their freedom. (Applause.) I believe that if given the chance, they will embrace the most honorable form of government ever devised by man. I believe these things, because I understand freedom is not America's gift to the world. Freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)This young century will be liberty's century. By promoting freedom at home and freedom abroad, we'll build a safer world and a more hopeful America. By reforming our systems of government, we'll help more Americans realize their dreams. We'll spread ownership and opportunity to every corner of this country. We'll pass the enduring values of our country on to a new generation. We'll continue to make the world a more free and, therefore, a more peaceful place.For all Americans, these years in our history will stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation, when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. It's a time that requires firm resolve, clear vision, and deep faith in the values that make us a great nation. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I'll never forget. There were workers in hard hats there yelling at the top of their lungs: Whatever it takes. I remember trying to console the people coming out of the rubble. A guy looked me in the eye, bloodshot eyes. He said: You do not let me down. Ever since that day, I've woken up -- I wake up every morning, ever since that day, thinking about how better to protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago -- four years ago, as I traveled this great country and your wonderful state asking for the vote, I made a pledge. I said that if you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the dignity and the honor of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, with your hard work, I will do so for four more years.God bless. Thank you all for coming. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Listen, thank you all for coming. Thanks for coming. Please be seated. So Hoekstra said, get over here. (Applause.) He said, come to Muskegon. I said, okay,  see if you can get some people to show up. (Applause.)Listen, thanks for coming. I'm here asking for the vote. (Applause.) I'm here to tell you I have a reason to ask for the vote. And we're going to do it a little differently today. I'm going to talk to some of our fellow citizens about health care, that's what I really want to spend some time on. I'm also going to talk about making America a safer place, making the world a safer place. (Applause.)Before we get started on issues that matter to the future of everybody in this country, there's an issue that matters to me, and that is, I hope I can also count on your help in order to win this election. (Applause.) That means registering people to vote. (Applause.) Step one is to remind your friends and neighbors that we have an obligation in a free society to participate. So anybody who is 18 years old who hasn't registered -- register. You have an obligation.And step two is once we register people to vote, is to get them to vote. And step three is when you get them headed into the polls, remind them America will be a safer place, a stronger place and a better place when you put Dick Cheney and me back into office. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years! (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Thank you all. Perhaps the most -- I'm ready for four more years, and perhaps the most important reason to give us four more years is so that Laura will be First Lady for four more years. (Applause.) So I said, will you marry me? She said, fine. She was a public school librarian in Texas. She said, yes, I'll marry you -- just so long as I don't have to give any political speeches. (Laughter.) Well, fortunately, that's a promise she didn't hold me to. People got to see her in New York City. She gave a fabulous speech. (Applause.) And the reason why is because she's a genuine, kind, compassionate person who is a great mom, a great wife. I love her dearly. And she sends her very best. (Applause.) She's out campaigning today.I want to thank my friend, Peter Hoekstra. He is a solid citizen and a very fine member of the United States Congress. (Applause.) He is -- and Diane, thanks for coming -- he is a highly respected member of Congress. He is now going to be in charge of the House Select Committee on Intelligence. I look forward to working with him to strengthen our intelligence-gathering capabilities so that we can do as good a job as possible about protecting our fellow citizens. Peter understands that the world changed on September the 11th. He understands we have a solemn duty in America to do everything we can to protect you. And I look forward to working with you, Pete. It's a great honor that you've been selected. (Applause.)I want to thank all the grassroots activists. Those are the unsung heroes who put up the signs and make the phone calls and do all the hard work. I want to thank you for what you have done; I want to thank you for what you're going to do --(laughter) -- over the next couple of weeks. You know, there's just no doubt in my mind that, with your help, we're going to carry Michigan and win the country. (Applause.)Listen, most people in America agree with my philosophy that the role of government is to help people realize their dreams, not to try to run their lives. The role of government is to say, what can we do to help you, not tell you what to do. And that's the fundamental difference of opinion in this campaign.One of the things I'm going to spend a lot of time talking about in this race is that I understand the world we live in has changed. And the fundamental systems of government must change with a changing world. People say, what do you mean? Well, think about the work force. When our dads and granddads were in the work force, they generally were working for one company, one career, had one pension plan, one health care plan. Today, the work force has changed. A lot of people have more than one job and more than one career. In other words, people are changing. Life is moving quite quickly.The other most massive change in the work force has been women. Women who used to stay at home are now not only working inside the house, are working outside the house. And, yet, the government systems haven't reflected this change. The pension plans were designed for yesterday. They need to be designed for tomorrow. If you're a senior citizen, you don't have to worry about Social Security. If you're a baby boomer, you don't have to worry about Social Security. And by the way, you'll hear the same rhetoric you hear every campaign, believe me, you know. Oh, don't worry, they're going to take away your Social Security check. It is the most tired, pathetic way to campaign for the presidency. So you don't have to worry about that. (Applause.)And baby boomers are fine. We're in good shape, you know. The people who aren't in good shape are the children and grandchildren in this country, because there's a lot fewer payer-inners than there are recipients when it comes to Social Security checks. I think we need to think differently for young folks when it comes to pension plans, and by that I mean younger folks ought to be able to take some of their own taxes and set aside a personal savings account. (Applause.)When you hear me talk about changing systems to help people, this is a -- this will help people when they have their own personal savings accounts which will enable them to actually receive Social Security benefits.The worker training programs were designed for yesterday. They need to be designed for tomorrow. That's why I'm such a big backer in community colleges. That's why I believe we ought to promote a lifetime of learning for workers. The jobs change in America. Sometimes the skill sets don't change with them. In order to make sure people can work and realize their dreams, the job training programs must adjust to a changing economy.We're going to talk about health care. It needs to be changed and modernized. It needs to reflect the world in which we live.The tax code needs to be changed. (Applause.) It's complicated -- it's a complicated mess, is what it is. Americans spend about 6 billion hours filling out the taxes. That's a lot of time and a lot of headache. The tax code is full of special interest loopholes. In a second term I'm going to work with both Republicans and Democrats to simplify the tax code, to make it more fair. This will not only help our economy grow, it'll help the American worker, it'll help the American family. So we're going to simplify the tax code. (Applause.)What I'm telling you is, I recognize the changing world in which we live, and the proper role of the government is to change the systems of government that were designed for yesterday, so that they reflect tomorrow. In order to make sure -- by the way, one of the biggest changes we have in America is the fact that our workers are more productive than ever. There have been high productivity increases, and that's great for the country. People say, what do you mean by productivity increases? It means you've gone from a shovel to a -- you know, to a mechanized digger, or from a manual typewriter to a computer, that's what it means, when you come more productive.And, yet, a more productive work force requires our economy to have sustained growth in order for people to find work. If the same worker can -- if one worker can double the output of the past, it means the economy has to grow faster in order to make sure people can find work, if they're not working. That's what that means. And, therefore, I put out a plan to make sure the economy that we have today is even stronger tomorrow.Now, when you're out gathering the vote, remind people we've been through a lot. Think about what this economy has been through. When we got in there, the market had already been declining for about five months. In other words, there was something fragile about the economy. And then we had a recession. The first three-quarters of my presidency were declared recession because economic growth was negative. In other words, we checked in to serve the American people, and the next thing we know is we've got a recession handed to us. And then we had some corporate scandals, and that affected the psychology of the country. Make no mistake about it: When somebody doesn't tell the truth in the corporate world, it affects economic growth. There should be no question in anybody's mind today that we will not tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of America. (Applause.)And then September the 11th came and it hurt us. I'm going to talk a little bit later on what it meant, in terms of working to secure the homeland. There's some interesting -- not ""interesting,"" really important lessons from that day.But they estimate we lost a million jobs in the three months after September the 11th. And, yet, if you think about it, we've overcome those obstacles. This economy of ours is strong, and it's getting stronger. (Applause.) And the fundamental question -- I mean, the national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent. That's lower than the average of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. (Applause.) Now, there are pockets in your state where the recovery is lagging behind the national average, I understand that. But that means we ought to put good policies in place and keep them in place, as opposed to resorting to the old, tired, you know, government approach.So I want to talk to you about how we're going to keep the economy growing. And one of the key aspects is to make sure the health care system works. Before we get to the health care system, let me -- here are some ideas that the American people need to hear. In order to make sure the job base expands in America, we need an energy policy that makes us less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.) I mean, it's going to be hard to sustain economic growth if we stay hooked. And we need to modernize our electricity grid, as well. I submitted a plan to the United States Congress over two years ago, and it's stuck. It's a plan that encourages conservation. It's a plan that recognizes technology is going to change much of the energy debate. In other words, hopefully within a decade, people will be driving hydrogen-powered automobiles. That makes sense. (Applause.)You know, we've got great research being done on clean coal technology, so we can use an available resource. We want people -- and one of -- I think a great opportunity for America is that someday they're going to walk in and say, here's the crop report, Mr. President, we're growing more corn than ever, and now were less dependent on foreign sources of energy. We ought to be using ethanol and biodiesel as ways to -- as ways to diversify our energy supply. (Applause.)I think we ought to be using technology to expand and advance nuclear power. We ought to be wise about how we diversify our energy supplies and encourage energy conservation. In order to keep this economy growing, we put forth a plan that Congress must pass in order to make us less dependent on foreign sources of energy.In order to make sure the economy grows, we've got to continue to open up markets. There's a lot of farmers in this part of the world, the farm economy is strong here -- strong in Michigan and it's strong around the world. One of the reasons why is because we're selling U.S. product in other markets -- that's one of the reasons why. Ask your corn growers, ask the people who are growing soy beans what it's like to be able to sell product grown here in Michigan, or elsewhere in America, overseas. And, listen, we've opened up our markets and it's good for you we have. Here's the way the economy works: If you've got more choices to choose from, you're likely to get the product you want at a better price and higher quality. That's how it works. My message to places like China is, you treat us the way we treat you -- because we can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere, so long as the rules are fair. (Applause.)One of the reasons we overcame the obstacles, one of the reasons this economy is growing is because of well-timed tax cuts. I mean, when you've got more money in your pocket, it means that your going to demand an additional good or a service. And when you demand an additional good or a service, somebody is going to have to produce it. And when somebody produces it, it means somebody is more likely to find work.One of the central tenets of that tax relief was, we're helping our small business owners. Do you realize 90 percent of the small business owners in America pay individual income taxes?AUDIENCE MEMBER: (Inaudible.)THE PRESIDENT: Good, well, there you are. Then you understand what tax relief means. (Laughter and applause.) When you give -- 70 percent of the new jobs in America are created by small businesses, and when you provide tax relief for small businesses, it means our economy is growing. That's what's happening here in America. (Applause.)And so here's the thing, we've got to do something about these frivolous lawsuits that are making it hard for small businesses to stay in business. (Applause.) We've got to reduce regulations on small businesses so they're able to hire. And we must not raise taxes. In order to keep this economy growing, in order to make sure that jobs are available -- not only this year, but in the out years -- we've got to keep your taxes low. And that's an issue in this campaign. It's an issue.I'm running against a fellow who has proposed over $2 trillion of new federal spending. That's a lot. And so they said, well, how are you going to pay for it? He said, oh, don't worry, I'm just going to tax the rich. Now, let me -- a couple of things wrong with that. One is, you can't tax the rich enough to pay for over $2 trillion of new money. In other words, there's the tax gap. Guess who's going to get stuck? Yes. Don't worry, we're not going to let him stick you, because we're going to win. (Applause.)Hold on a second. A couple of other things. Thank you all. We've got a lot of work to do here, though. (Laughter.) I appreciate the cheering.Secondly, if you run up the top two brackets on the individual income taxes, you're taxing about a million small businesses, is what you're doing. Now, why in the heck would you want to tax small businesses just as this economy is beginning to grow? If 70 percent of the new jobs are -- in America, are created by small businesses, why would you want to tax the job creators? You wouldn't.Thirdly, you've heard the rhetoric, right, tax the rich? We've heard that before. The rich hire accountants and lawyers for a reason. (Laughter.) And you get stuck with the bill. Raising taxes is wrong right now for this economy, and we're not going to let him get away with it. We are going to win. (Applause.) Taxes is a big issue in this campaign. I intend to make it an issue all across the country. (Applause.)Let me talk about health care. We're going to talk about health care now. And I've asked some folks to come and explain to you some of the reasons why our policy makes sense. You've probably already heard enough from me already for one day.AUDIENCE: No!THE PRESIDENT: Okay, well, that's good. I'm just looking for a little affirmation. (Laughter.) If that's the case, I'm just getting wound up. (Applause.)I have a practical common-sense plan to make health care available and affordable, and that's important; a practical way to make sure health care is available and affordable, and a way to make sure good doctors keep practicing medicine. (Applause.)I believe health care decisions should be made by doctors and patient, not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. (Applause.) We have a difference of opinion in this campaign. I'm running against a fellow who has got a massive, complicated blueprint to have our government take over the decision-making in health care.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: His plan, if you listen carefully to what he says, would have bureaucrats become the decision-makers, and that would be wrong for America. As well, today, there's a independent study, which has been released, which says that his plan would cost the taxpayers $1.5 trillion in new government spending. Not only is his plan going to increase the power of bureaucrats in your lives, but he can't pay for it unless he raises your taxes.Today, we're going to talk about a difference of opinion. It starts with -- you know, what would you expect from a Senator from Massachusetts? (Laughter and applause.) That's what you would expect -- a government take-over of health care with an enormous price tag. We're going to talk about a way to make sure health care is available and affordable, and start with Medicare. You might remember the old Medicare debates. They were called, ""Mediscare,"" because people wouldn't dare talk about changing them. I believe we have a duty to our seniors. I believe we have a moral obligation to make sure health care is available and affordable to our seniors. (Applause.)Look, I went up to Washington to fix problems. You know, I said, if I'm fortunate enough to win -- this is what I said in 2000 -- I'm going up to address problems, not pass them on to future generations and future Presidents. My style is to say, here's a problem, let's come together to fix it. We had a problem in Medicare. And the problem was that medicine was modernizing and Medicare wasn't. People say, what do you mean by that? Well, Medicare would pay for, you know, $100,000, say, for heart surgery, but wouldn't pay for the prescription drugs to prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. That didn't make any sense. (Applause.) It didn't make any sense for our seniors, it didn't make any sense for the taxpayers.And so we modernized Medicare. Listen, seniors should get a prescription drug card today, it will help you with your cost of drugs. Starting in 2005, we'll have preventative care and screenings for our seniors as a part of Medicare. (Applause.) That makes sense. You hear me say I've got a commonsense, practical plan -- it's practical to have seniors tested early so we can diagnose problems before it's too late. It's practical for seniors to be given preventative screening in Medicare, and in 2006, prescription drugs will be available for senior citizens in Medicare. We have strengthened Medicare, and it's good for our seniors we have done so. (Applause.)To make health care available and affordable, we've got to do something about the junk lawsuits that are running up the cost of medicine. (Applause.) And those junk lawsuits are running good docs out of practice. If the goal is an available and affordable health care, we've got to do something about lawsuits. Make no mistake about it, these lawsuits are running up your cost of medicine. You ask small business owners, you ask docs what it's like to practice in a litigious society -- that means there's a lot of lawsuits. (Laughter.) I'm not even a lawyer and I know the word ""litigious."" (Laughter and applause.)And so -- people say, well, that was a local issue. No, it's not a local issue when the cost of medicine is skyrocketing or the cost of health care is skyrocketing because of the defensive medicine being practiced by docs, so if they get sued they're able to have a good case in the courthouse. And it costs the taxpayers about $28 billion a year for docs to practice medicine defensively.And, therefore, I went to Congress and said, this is a national problem, it requires a national solution. We need medical liability reform. Of course, it's stuck in the United States Senate. It came out of the House, and I want to thank Pete for his support. It's stuck in the Senate because the trial lawyers are powerful, they are a powerful special interest, they stand in the way of good medical liability reform. This a big difference in this campaign. I like to remind people you can't be pro-doctor or pro-patient and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. You have to choose. (Applause.)My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. (Applause.) I made my choice: I'm standing with the docs and patients; I am for medical liability reform now. (Applause.)There's more to do to make health care available and affordable. We've got to modernize the health care information. I believe that within the next 10 years we can have electronic health records, with safeguards for your privacy, which will cut down on the administrative costs of health. We can save a lot of money by using technology to modernize health care.In order to make sure that health care is available, we need to expand the government insurance program for children. In other words, it exists, but many children are not using it. We've got a billion dollars available in the budget to encourage families to take advantage of government-sponsored health care for children, for low-income children. It makes sense to make sure that the programs are fully utilized in every aspect of our -- in every corner of our country.In order to make sure health care is available, we need to expand community health centers. Tom Lufkin is with us, we're about to talk about community health centers. (Applause.) I made a promise, by the way, when I was running. I said, these things make sense for low-income Americans, to have a place to get preventative care; it's better that they get care in a community center, rather than an emergency room in a hospital. I think it's good use of taxpayer's money to expand these, and we're doing it, we're fulfilling the promise I made in the 2000 campaign. (Applause.) I made a further pledge: I think every poor county in America community health center.Tell us what they are, Tom. Thanks for coming. (Applause.)* * * * *THE PRESIDENT: Appreciate that. Thanks. See, I believe government ought to help people who can't help themselves. And the idea is to help people so they can help themselves -- but there are some who just can't, some who are stuck, some who are poor. In the land of plenty, there are pockets of poverty, we've got to understand that. And the idea is to make sure that preventative health care is available through community health centers.I want to thank you for your compassion. An interesting point he said was these health centers spawn other acts of generosity in communities -- people see that they're up and available, and other people who have got good hearts, who want to love their neighbor like they'd like to be loved themselves step up and participate in helping those who hurt, in helping those who need help.And so one way to make sure health care is available is to expand community health centers throughout the country. And that's what we're doing. I want to thank you for coming, Tom.Another way to make sure health care is affordable and available is to help small businesses with health care. Now, here's the problem for small businesses: they go out and bid in the current system and they don't have a significant pool of people to spread risk. That's the problem. They're in the midst of trying to provide health care in their businesses and they go out and try to get a bid for health care, and they're kind of a little, stand-alone entity. Now, big companies are able to pool risk because of their size. We believe in order to make sure health care is available and affordable, that little companies ought to be able to bind -- be bound together, share risk, so they can get the same discounts that big companies get. (Applause.)David. David Pray. I was looking for you, and finally found you. (Laughter.) Tell us what you do.* * * * *THE PRESIDENT: Good, that's a good sign, isn't it? Upbeat guy. Small company, how many employees?MR. PRAY: We have 10 employees.THE PRESIDENT: Ten, that's small. That's the definition of a small business. And so he was telling me aboard Air Force One there that he has some problems with health care.MR. PRAY: Well, we've been -- through Associated Builders and Contractors, we have been in a state-wide pool for quite some time. And for a lot of years, we enjoyed about a 10 to 15 percent cost advantage over being -- over going out and finding single, affordable policies elsewhere.THE PRESIDENT: So they got a plan here in Michigan where you can pool together. It's a nice concept. However?MR. PRAY: However, last year, the state of Michigan passed legislation called Small Group Health Care Reform which, instead of now being able to pool the risk over 400 member companies, premiums are now calculated based on claims history. So we don't have the advantage of pooling anymore. And the immediate effect for our company was a 29 percent increase in our premiums. And bear in mind that we, as a company, feel a duty to provide the medical and dental care, not only for the employee, himself, but for his dependents. We fund 100 percent of that cost.THE PRESIDENT: So here's what we're talking about. Listen, this guy's a responsible guy, you know. He says, I've got a duty as a employer of people to do the best I can do. The problem is the system is so designed that he can't really do his job because he is unable to pool risk. See, the more people you have in the risk pool, the lower the cost of health insurance. That's just how it works.And so what we're suggesting is, is that David be able to combine with companies, not only in Michigan, but nationwide. I mean, why shouldn't a guy building commercial construction in Texas not be able to put his employees in the same pool as David? The reason why is because the health systems were designed for the past. The current health care system is stuck in the past, as far as I'm concerned.A national plan -- in other words, people being able to bind together nationally would mean that a lot of mandates that now affect the cost of health care would not be -- would not be imposed upon these small businesses, and it means that more people could bind together. People resist this because they like the system the way it is. What we're interested in is, we don't like the way it is. We're interested in change. Government must be willing to change with the times. Association health plans mean we're willing to change with the times to help small employers be able to provide good health insurance for their workers. (Applause.)Another way -- as you can see, I've got a strategy to make sure health care is available and affordable without the federal government making the decisions for you. See, we've said, we're going to take care of those who can't help themselves, we're going to make sure small businesses are able to afford insurance, just like big businesses can do, and now, I want to talk about a very interesting idea called health savings accounts. This is a different approach to health care, which will mean that the patient and doctor are essential to the decision-making process, and helps us hold down the cost of health care. Health savings accounts are an innovative idea that became the law of the land as a result of the Medicare bill I signed. And I want -- I want some people to describe. Matt, are you willing to describe what it means?MR. VENEMA: Yes.THE PRESIDENT: Okay, don't worry about all the cameras. (Laughter.)MR. VENEMA: All right, all right. I'll try to forget about those.THE PRESIDENT: First, start with the name of the company and why you're even involved.MR. VENEMA: The name of our company is All-Flo Plumbing, LLC. We're a plumbing contractor in the Grand Rapids and West Michigan region. We were struggling under the burden of our health care.THE PRESIDENT: How many people, sorry?MR. VENEMA: Fourteen employees, 12 full-time.THE PRESIDENT: Small business, thousands of small businesses just like his all over the world, all over the country, all over America. (Applause.) The heart and soul of the American economy are these small business owners. Sorry. Giving you time to warm up. (Laughter.)* * * * *THE PRESIDENT: Hold on a minute. Sorry. You've got to make sure the people understand what we're talking about. A lot of times, you use initials in government. (Laughter.) HSA. Okay, here it is.So you buy a high deductible --MR. VENEMA: High deductible health policy.THE PRESIDENT: -- health policy to cover for major medical costs, right?MR. VENEMA: Correct. Correct.THE PRESIDENT: So, for example, if you're a family -- I've said, this company, he'll tell you what his is, I think it's a zero --MR. VENEMA: Pardon me?THE PRESIDENT: What is your deductible in your --MR. VENEMA: It's $3,500 for a family plan.THE PRESIDENT: So above $3,500, the insurance company will take care of the costs.MR. VENEMA: Absolutely.THE PRESIDENT: And then so what happens between zero and $3,500?MR. VENEMA: As the employer, we took most of the portion of our savings and funded the HSA plans for each individual employee.THE PRESIDENT: So the company is now putting in the money to cover routine medical expenses from zero to $3,500. They're able to put it in tax-free, they're able to rollover the money tax-free, and they're able to take the money out of the HSA tax-free.MR. VENEMA: Yes, it's a nice benefit for the individual employee. If they happen to have a good health situation, they get a tax-free savings account. If something goes wrong, they're still covered. And my wife and I gave this a good test run last year because we had a premature baby, and $20,000 in health bills at the hospital, and it worked like a charm. So we're very happy with this plan.THE PRESIDENT: Let's make sure we understand here. This is -- we're trying to simplify what sounds like a complex issue. And zero to $3,500, you pay -- ""you"" being the company and the employee, depending upon the arrangement. Now, if you spend $2,000 in the year, $1,500 of that $3,500 that's in your account rolls over for the next year. And that's your money. And it's tax-free, it rolls over. So you build up a health savings account over time. (Applause.)Now, think about a system, by the way that provides an incentive for you to make good choices with your life. If you save that money by -- because you're healthier, that may cause you to go out and walk 20 minutes a day. No fooling. In other words, the system all of a sudden says, you're in charge. You, the employee, or, you, the patient, you're incharge of your decisions, as opposed to somebody far away making decisions whether or not you deserve this or not through your insurance plan, you're the person in charge. And there's a tax incentive for you to make right decisions.All right, any savings?MR. VENEMA: Yes, actually when we switched over, the premium savings have been phenomenal. Our total group expenditure right now for health insurance, including what we contribute to everyone's HSAs, is $38,500 a year, approximately. If we were still under our previous conventional plan, it would be about $81,000 a year. So we're talking about a 52 percent savings for our group. And we've been very excited about that. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: These work. I'm telling you, they work. They make a lot of sense. (Applause.) Health care is more affordable under health savings accounts, and health care is more manageable because the decision-making is between the patient and the doc. And it's really important for people to understand that. This stands in contrast to a system where the federal government is going to say, oh, here's what's going to happen here. We're going to move people from private health insurance to expanded Medicaid, for example. You don't want the government making decisions on your behalf when it comes to health care. And this is one of the fundamental philosophical differences in this campaign, is who do you trust? We trust the people. My opponent trusts the government to make decisions when it comes to health care.Now, we've got another man here who knows something about it. Jim, tell us what's -- welcome.* * * * *THE PRESIDENT: It's an interesting twist. (Laughter.) You're not the first person in America, by the way -- (laughter an applause.) Go ahead. Would you care to clarify why you were mad at me? (Laughter.)MR. GLUPKER: I can do that --THE PRESIDENT: -- a fellow like me, sitting here.MR. GLUPKER: I'm just a little disappointed that it wasn't available to me 30 and 35 years ago, when I was a young family, you know? Because then that account would have a lot more in it than it does today.THE PRESIDENT: Yes, see, explain to people -- you've got an account up and running. And you've used it?MR. GLUPKER: I've used it, and the interesting thing is, when we changed over --THE PRESIDENT: They work for the same company, by the way.MR. GLUPKER: Yes. We were able to keep our same doctors, which was interesting. And the other thing is, because it's our money, when we go shopping for prescription drugs and stuff, we shop, because why pay $100 for that prescription when you can go down the street and only pay $80?THE PRESIDENT: Yes. See, that's a very interesting point, isn't it? There is a marketplace in America if consumers are empowered to have choice. That's what we're talking about here. We go shop. The old system, when the government is involved, they don't shop. They dictate. Here, consumers shop. It's your money. You're in charge of your money. In this case, the company puts a lot of money in there that you call your own money. It's part of the -- it's part of how they make sure the labor relations are good inside this little company, is they contribute to the health savings account. And he's out shopping.People ask me about prescription drugs a lot. Let me -- a couple of points I want to talk to you about. And one -- one way to make sure that prescription drug costs are reasonable is to encourage people to go into the marketplace and to provide more information to people so that they're not necessarily buying a brand drug when the generic is available. Generics are a lot cheaper than brand drugs, but nevertheless, they do the same thing.Secondly, we've got to move generic drugs quicker to the market. That's important for us to do, and we've got plans to do so. (Applause.) As a matter of fact, the Medicare bill helps do that. There's a lot of stalling tactics sometimes in the industry, where they say, we've got a new add-on that needs to be -- need to extend the protection period for our brand drug. Well, we're cutting through all that. We're saying, here's a reasonable period of time for you to recoup your investment, and generics are going to move quicker.I'm asked a lot about importation of drugs. It's an interesting idea. But, remember, my job is to protect you as best I can. That's the role of the government. And what we don't want to do is have a system where it sounds like a pharmaceutical may be coming in from Canada, but, in fact, it is manufactured in another country. I suspect the consumers of this country, while it sounds good that these may be able to help us on price of drugs if they come in from Canada -- before I'll allow that to happen, I'm going to make sure that you're safe. Because all you need to do is get a batch of drugs manufactured elsewhere that sounds like they're legitimate, and get sick, and then you're going to be wondering, where were the people, why weren't they doing their jobs of protecting consumer safety? And so I'm interested in knowing whether or not we can make sure you're safe. That's a duty we have in the federal government. (Applause.)Seems like to me, the best way to make sure that drug costs are reasonable is encourage the consumer to be a pricer in the market and to speed up generics. They say we'll save $35 billion over 10 years by speeding up the generic drugs to the marketplace -- what we're doing.Anyway, I hope you've got a better sense of where I intend to take health care. It's a practical way to make sure health care is available and affordable. (Applause.)And it's a comprehensive plan. We've thought through this very carefully. It's commonsensical. In other words, it makes sense to do it this way, because the alternative is, in my solemn judgment, not right for the American people. Having the federal government run your business and health care is -- would be -- would be costly, it would lead to rationing of health care, it would mean that you're not in charge of your decisions -- which is the exact opposite philosophy we hold.Now, let me talk to you about making America a safer place, and the world a safer place. A couple of things I want to share with you. One, it's important never to forget the lessons of September the 11th, and I'm not going to forget them. I'm not going to forget them.The first lesson is, the enemy we face is cold-blooded and they have no conscience; that you cannot negotiate with these people, in other words. You cannot hope for the best from them. You cannot hope they'll change their ways. See, these are people who profess, you know, Islam -- they've hijacked Islam and they've substituted the peaceful nature of Islam with an ideology of hate. And they used terrorism as a tool to shake our will, to shake the conscience of the free world. And so the only way to deal with them is to stay on the offense, is to chase them down overseas so we don't have to face them here at home, and we will. (Applause.)And it's important -- okay, if you'll all hold on -- thank you. I've got a little more work to do, though. Got some things on my mind --AUDIENCE MEMBER: Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Oh, we'll have a chance to do a little ""four more year"" thing in a minute. (Laughter.) I've got to tell you what's on my mind. I want you to know I have a reason for running again. I've got a plan to make this world a safer place, and the country a more hopeful place. That's why I'm running. (Applause.)See, we've done a lot in this administration, but the only reason to look backwards is to best determine who to lead us forward. And that's what I'm talking about here. I just want you to know I have a plan and a reason for running, so that you can go out and tell your friends and neighbors: let's put him back in there; he's got some good ideas; he understands what he's doing when it comes to making sure this economy continues to grow, making sure that families are strong, making sure that the institutions and systems are changed in order to help the American people; and he's got a plan and a vision to make this world a safer place. And that's what I'm here to tell you.First, I know the nature of the enemy. It means we must be relentless and unyielding. (Applause.) Secondly -- and we must use all tools at our disposal. That's why I'm looking forward to working with Peter, to make sure the intelligence system -- see, we were chasing down people who hide in caves, people who kind of lurk in the dark corners of cities around the world. And, therefore, we need good intelligence, and we're working with friends and allies in order to share intelligence. You know, people -- we'll use law enforcement. We're darn sure going to use our United States military, too, to protect the American people. (Applause.) And that's why it's important for our military to be, you know, transformed, to meet the threats of the 21st century.Secondly, since it's a different kind of war, in order to make sure America is safer, I laid out a new doctrine that said if you harbor a terrorist, you're just as guilty as the terrorist. Now, when the American President says something, he better mean it. (Applause.) When the American President says something, he's got to speak in a way that's easy for people to understand and mean what he says. I meant what I said when I said to the Taliban, if you harbor a terrorist, like al Qaeda, you're just as guilty as they are. They ignored what we said. And that's why they're no longer in power. (Applause.) In other words, we said, if you continue doing what you're doing, you're not going to be in power. And as a result of a great United States military, and as a result of brave souls, Afghanistan has been liberated from a barbaric group of people. And we're safer for it. (Applause.)Al Qaeda can no longer train because we upheld doctrine. Remember, they were training thousands of people in Afghanistan, so they could put these terrorist cells around the world. Way before September the 11th, they were training in Afghanistan, plotting and planning. You know, somebody said, well, they -- by staying on the offense, you're creating more enemy. I strongly disagree with that sentiment. I strongly disagree. (Applause.) They were planning -- they were plotting and planning way before September the 11th. No, by staying on the offense, we're reducing the enemy. By keeping the pressure on them, we're reducing the enemy and making America more secure. And by upholding doctrine, we're making America more secure, as well.Now, think about Afghanistan for a second. Not only is the Taliban out, and al Qaeda had lost a safe haven, but people are free in that country, and that matters to America. It should. Because free societies promote peace. Free societies become allies when it comes to fighting off the ideologues of hate.You know, it just wasn't all that long ago -- it was three years ago that young girls weren't allowed to go to school -- many young girls -- most young girls weren't allowed to go to school in Afghanistan. That's backwards, see? When you've got people running a country that is so -- so clouded in their vision that they wouldn't let young girls go to school, is a society that would breed, you can imagine, incredible resentment. It's a hopeless society. That's how terrorists are able to recruit, because there's no hope. Freedom -- a free society is one that promotes hope. You know, their moms would be drug out in the public square and whipped. And that matters to America, because we believe in human dignity. We believe -- we believe in the value of every human being. That's why we support a culture of life, because we believe in life. (applause.)Think about this, tell your friends and neighbors this amazing statistic when it comes to Afghanistan -- at least I think it's amazing. But three years ago, these people lived in a dark world. Today, there's light and freedom is -- freedom is moving rapidly to that country to the extent that 10 million citizens, 41 percent of whom are women, are registered to vote in the presidential elections that will be taking place next month. Think about that. Amazing, isn't it? (Applause.)I have -- I can't remember all the people that wrote and opined about what it was like going into Afghanistan back then. I suspect some probably said that these people can't be free; You know, they really don't want to be free. Freedom is powerful. And I'm just guessing that there were some people that were pessimistic about the country's dream of having a democracy there in Afghanistan. But 10 million people -- that wasn't all that long ago that women were pulled off a bus by the Taliban and murdered because they were involved in the election process.Third lesson is, when we see a threat, we must deal with it before it fully materializes. In other words, one of the lessons of September the 11th is that oceans no longer protect us from harm's way. It used to be, prior to September the 11th, that if we saw a threat, we could deal with it or not deal with it because we never dreamt it would come home to hurt us if we saw something materializing overseas. Policymakers in the country could say, well, that makes sense to deal with that, or, we can let that one go, because it can't possibly -- it can't possibly hurt us. That's what we thought. And history had taught us that. I can understand why everybody felt that way. But September the 11th changed that equation.And, therefore, when we see a threat, this country must deal with that threat so it doesn't come home to harm us. And I saw a threat in Saddam Hussein. The reason I saw a threat in Saddam Hussein is because I was looking at intelligence that said he was a threat. But as importantly, I remembered his history. He was a sworn enemy of the United States of America. We had been to war with him once before. He was shooting at our pilots who were enforcing the world's sanctions. He had harbored terrorists. Remember Abu Nidal? He killed Leon Klinghoffer. Abu Nidal and his organization was in Iraq. Zarqawi, he's still lingering around. He had an organization. He's got ties to al Qaeda. He's The guy who beheads people to shake our conscience. He was in and out of Baghdad. Saddam Hussein paid the families of suicidersNow, he was a threat. I went to the Congress and I said, the world has changed. And they looked at the -- they agreed. They looked at the intelligence I looked at. They remembered his history. And they concluded, members of the Congress from both political parties, concluded that Saddam Hussein was a threat, and they authorized the use of force. My opponent, he looked at the very same intelligence my administration looked at. And he voted ""yes"" when it came time to authorize the use of force. I went to the United Nations -- and I'll tell you why I went to the U.N., because I believe before a Commander-in-Chief commits troops into harm's way, we must try all avenues, all avenues to solve a problem. I understand the grave decision of sending men and women into harm's way. It's a decision I wish I hadn't had to make as your President. It's a decision, however, that came to my desk because of the actions of an enemy.And so I went to the United Nations in the hopes that we could solve this problem diplomatically. And so I gave a speech, I remember, there talking about the threat, reminding people of the world that we lived in after September the 11th. And the United Nations looked at the same intelligence I looked at and remembered the same history, and voted 15 to nothing to send this message to Saddam Hussein: You disarm -- or disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences. Now, I believe when you say something, you better mean it in order to make the world a more free and peaceful place. That's what I think. I think when you say something, in order to -- (applause.) If you're going to vote to authorize force, you better mean it. If you're going to say, ""serious consequences,"" you better mean it.But Saddam Hussein ignored the demands of the free world once again. People say, well, you didn't try diplomacy. Diplomacy had been tried for a decade. This was a confirmation that he wasn't interested in complying with the demands of the free world. I think there was, what, 17 U.N. resolutions? Something like that. A lot. Like, resolution after resolution after resolution. And he wasn't interested in complying. One reason we knew is because he systematically deceived the inspectors.And so I have a choice to make at this point: Do I forget the lessons of September the 11th, take the word of a madman -- or take action to defend this country? Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)Thank you. A couple other points.It's hard work in Iraq and Afghanistan. I know that, and I want to thank the family members who are here who -- if you've got a loved one in the military, I want to thank you for the sacrifices you've made and the sacrifices your son, daughter, husband, or wife have made on behalf of this country. It's not easy to help a country. There are people around this world that want to stop the march of freedom because they see it as the biggest threat to their ideology of hate. That's the fact.A lesson I've learned, and a lesson that -- it wasn't hard for me to learn it, either -- was that any time you put troops into harm's way, the federal government needs to support them so they can finish their mission. (Applause.) That's why -- that's why a year ago, I went to the Congress and proposed $87 billion of supplemental funding to make sure Marines, like this man right here, have got what it takes to do the job.And we got great support in Congress. You might remember that, Pete, about how members of both parties stood up and recognized the need for us to support troops in harm's way. As a matter of fact, the support was so strong that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against essential funding for our troops -- only 12 -- two of whom were my opponent and his running mate, were part of those 12.Interestingly enough, when you're out gathering the vote, you might remind people that there was only four members of the United States Senate that voted to authorize the use of force and then didn't vote to fund the troops. And two of those four were my opponent and his running mate. You might remember, when asked to explain why he made the vote he made, he said, I actually did vote for the $87 billion, right before I voted against it. (Laughter.) See, I think a President needs to speak clearly and mean what he says. So they kept pressing him. He finally said, the whole thing is a complicated matter. There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)A couple other things I want to share with you -- a couple of other things then we've got to move on down the road in the bus. (Laughter.) It's a bus tour. (Laughter.) It's exciting to go on a bus tour, because a lot of people come out and they want to wave, and it warms my heart to see many people lining the roads like -- that's what happens on these trips.Let me tell you a couple of other things. One, people say, what's the mission? The mission is, in Afghanistan and Iraq, to help those countries become free countries, is to help on the road to democracy, is to help the political process go forward. Remember, Iraq is going to be having elections in January. They've got a tough Prime Minister. I like him, Allawi. He's a strong guy. He's they guy that, by the way, survived an assassination attempt by Saddam Hussein. The guy sent the people in to -- he was living in London at the time -- they sent a ax-wielding thug to try to chop him to pieces. And he survived it. Seriously. So he understands. He understands the tyrant.He believes in the aspirations of the people. He wants there to be elections. He knows that Iraq can handle democracy. It's what he believes in his soul. I believe we ought to help him get there. When we give our word, we need to keep our word. In order to make the world a more peaceful place, when you say something, you better mean it. And we've told the people of Afghanistan, Iraq, we'll help them. We will stay the course so that they can develop an army and police force of their own so they can defend themselves. That's what we're doing. We're providing stability for a political process to go forward, and we're training troops so they can do the hard work, so they can step up, so they can help the reconstruction efforts go forward. It's precisely what we're doing. And we're going to get -- get the job done as quickly as possible, and then our troops will come home with the honor they've earned. And the world will be better off. I believe liberty can transform the world. (Applause.)Listen, we all want peace. And I believe it's going to happen, that our children and grandchildren will grow up in a peaceful world, that we will make America secure by staying on the offense. But in the long-run, our security comes from spreading liberty.You know, I tell people that one of my favorite leaders in the world is Prime Minister Koizumi, of Japan. I want you to think about this here for a minute. You know, I sit down at a table with them, and have dinner, and we have really interesting, meaningful discussions about peace. What's unusual about that conversation is that 60 years ago, or so, my dad and your dads and husbands and grandfathers were at war with the Japanese. They were a sworn enemy of America. Thousands lost their life because of the Japanese. Fortunately, Harry Truman believed in the power of liberty to transform societies, and so did a lot of other Americans. There was a lot of skeptics, and you can understand why there was skepticism after World War II. If your loved one had been over fighting and had lost a life, how could you possibly imagine that a sworn enemy could become a friend?But because our predecessors believed in the power of liberty -- I mean, predecessors for citizens and elected officials -- to transform an enemy into a friend, today, Japan is a friend.We did the hard work after World War II of helping Japan go toward a democracy. Not an American democracy, but a Japanese democracy. And today, I sit down at a table with Prime Minister Koizumi talking about the peace, talking about how to deal with the tyrant in North Korea. By the way, it is now five voices reminding him that he needs to disarm, including China, as opposed to one voice reminding him. (Applause.)I talked to -- I talked to Prime Minister Koizumi about how liberty can transform Iraq and Afghanistan to become allies in the war on terror. I talked to a head of a country that we were at war with about how free societies will serve as powerful examples for women who want to be free in the Middle East or for reformers who wonder whether or not the free world hears their calls for help. I talked to him about feeding the hungry.I believe to whom much has been given, much is required. I believe this United States of America must use our great wealth and generosity to help those who are hungry in the world. I believe we ought to continue to lead the effort to help orphans whose lives have been changed because of the pandemic of HIV/AIDS on the continent of Africa. I believe we not only need to write checks, I believe we need to unleash the great faith-based programs of America to help those who suffer. (Applause.)I believe all these things. And of course, we'll continue to provide medicines, and help, and infrastructure to help save lives. I believe all this because the actions we take will mean that a generation of young Americans can grow up in a better world. The enemy attacked us. We didn't ask for this attack. They attacked us. But out of this attack, because of U.S. leadership, because we've got great values, because of our resolve, because of a clear vision of a better world, out of that attack is going to come some incredible good, in my judgment: a safer America, a more peaceful world, a better life.And that's why I'm asking for the vote for four more years. I know where I want to lead us. I have the energy and desire to do so. And I'm not afraid to ask for your help.God bless. Thanks for coming. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all. (Applause.) Thank you all very much for coming. By the sound of things, it sounds like the Herd is thundering. (Applause.) It's good to be back here in Huntington. Thank you all for the hospitality. You know, this isn't my first time here. (Applause.) I've liked it every time I've come. (Applause.) Because the people are down to earth, hardworking, decent, and they  love America just like I do. (Applause.)I want to thank our friends from Ohio who have joined us today. I appreciate you coming. (Applause.) I want to thank our friends from Kentucky who are here today. (Applause.) And of course, I want to thank my friends from West Virginia who are here. Thank you all for coming. (Applause.)I told Zell we're going to have a heck of a day. He's helping to kick it off in fine fashion. You know, Zell Miller, he represents a lot of folks out there who are wondering whether or not it's okay to vote Republican. He's what I would call a discerning Democrat. (Applause.) More importantly, he is a proud American, and I'm proud to call Zell Miller friend. (Applause.)I'm here to ask for the vote. (Applause.) I'm here to let you know that I'm willing to get amongst the people and say, I need your vote and I need your help to win this election. (Applause.) You see, we have a duty in this country to vote, and I would hope you would go out and register your friends and neighbors. Remind them we have a duty. Register our fellow Republicans, register independents, register discerning Democrats. (Applause.) Then after you register them, get them headed to the polls. And when you get them headed to the polls, remind them, if they want a safer America, a stronger America, and a better America, put Dick Cheney and me back in there for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Thank you all. Zell said -- we got on the bus after flying up from Washington, and he said, I wish you'd have brought Laura. (Applause.) He's got really good judgment. (Laughter.) You know, when I asked Laura to marry me, she said, fine, I'll be -- I'm willing to marry you, just so long as I never have to give a political speech. (Laughter.) She was a public school librarian who didn't particularly care about politics or politicians. I said, that's fine, you'll never have to give a speech. And we got married. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that promise. (Laughter.) She is a -- the country saw, in New York City, she not only gives a good speech, but she's gracious and strong, she's comforting. I love her dearly. (Applause.) Perhaps the most important reason of all in putting me back in office is so that Laura will have four more years as your First Lady. (Applause.)I appreciate Congresswoman Shelly Moore Capito, from the great state of West Virginia, joining us today. (Applause.) Shelly Moore is a fine, fine member of the United States Congress. She's a class act. I also appreciate today traveling with Senator Mike DeWine from the state of Ohio. I appreciate you coming, Mike. (Applause.) He, too, is a fine United States Senator, and I'm proud his son, Patrick, is joining us today, as well.I want to thank all the state and local officials here. I want to thank all the candidates for throwing your hat in the ring. I appreciate the Wil Gravatt Band. I want to thank the Parkersburg Base Army Reserve Charlie Company, the 463rd Engineering Battalion. Thank you all for coming. (Applause.)Most of all, thank you all for taking Friday out of your life to come. I appreciate you being here -- (applause) -- for taking this Friday to come here. I appreciate it. It means a lot to me. I know it means a lot to Zell. See, I'm looking forward to this campaign. I'm going to tell the people where I stand and what I believe and where I'll lead this country. (Applause.)I believe every child can learn, and expect every school to teach. (Applause.) I went to Washington to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations. I believe we ought to raise standards. I believe we ought to measure early to solve problems before it's too late. I believe we got to stop this practice of just shuffling kids through our schools year after year, grade after grade without learning the basics. (Applause.) I believe we got to trust the local people to make the right decisions for their schools. I know we're closing the achievement gap in America, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)I believe we have a moral responsibility to honor our seniors with good health care. (Applause.) Medicare is an incredibly important program for our seniors, but it wasn't modernizing. People say, what do you mean when you say that? Well, Medicare would pay thousands and thousands and thousands of dollars for heart surgery, but it would not pay for the prescription drugs to prevent the heart surgery from being needed. That didn't make any sense for our seniors, it didn't make any sense for our taxpayers. I went to Washington, D.C. to solve problems. We have now modernized Medicare to help our seniors. Beginning in 2006, seniors will get prescription drug coverage, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)I believe in the energy, innovation and spirit of America's workers, small business owners, farmers and ranchers. And that's why we unleashed that energy with the largest tax relief in a generation. (Applause.)When you're out rounding up the vote, remind people about what this economy has been through. Five months before we got into office the stock market had started to decline. We had a recession right as we got there. There was corporate scandals. By the way, we made it clear we're not going to tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of America. (Applause.) We had a terrorist attack on our country. All those were obstacles for our American workers. See, we're overcoming these obstacles. We're overcoming these obstacles because we got great workers, great farmers. We're overcoming it because the entrepreneurial spirit is strong. We're overcoming it because of well-time tax relief. (Applause.)Our economy is growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. We've added about 1.7 million new jobs in the past year. We've added 107,000 manufacturing jobs since January. The national unemployment rate is 5.4 percent. (Applause.) That's lower than the average rate of the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.) The unemployment rate in West Virginia is 5.2 percent. The economic stimulus plan we passed is working. (Applause.)I believe the most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This isn't going to happen on my watch. (Applause.) I'm running for President with a clear and positive plan to build a safer world and a more hopeful America. I'm running with a compassionate conservative philosophy that government should help people improve their lives, not try to run their lives. (Applause.) I believe this nation wants steady, consistent, principled leadership, and that is why, with your help, we will carry West Virginia again, we'll carry Ohio again, we'll carry Kentucky again, and we'll win in November. (Applause.)Because I understand the world we're living in is changing. The generation of our dads and grandads, a person generally had one job, one career, worked for one company that provided health care and a pension. Today it's different. The work force has changed. Most of those workers in the past were men; today many, many workers are women. They're working inside the home and outside the home. (Applause.) Many people change jobs and careers several times over the course of a lifetime. Yet many of the fundamental systems -- the tax code, health coverage, pension plans, worker training -- were created for the world of yesterday, not tomorrow. And so, for the next four years, we'll transform the systems to help our citizens. We'll transform these systems so all citizens are equipped, prepared, and thus, truly free to make your own choices so you can realize the great promise of America. (Applause.)Any hopeful society has a growing economy, and I have a plan to keep this economy moving forward. To create more jobs in America, America must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.) That means we've got to reduce the regulations on our businesses, particularly small businesses. (Applause.) It means we got to stop these junk lawsuits that are threatening employers all across the country. (Applause.) It means Congress needs to get my energy policy to my desk. Yes, in order to create jobs here in America, we need sound energy policy. That means more conservation, that means supporting renewables, and that means using coal, clean coal technology to make sure people can find work. (Applause.)The plan I submitted will modernize the electricity grid so hospitals and offices can keep focus on hiring workers, not coping with blackouts. What I'm telling you is, we need an energy policy that makes us less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)Listen, to create jobs, we've got to reject economic isolationism and open up markets for U.S. products. See, we open up our markets for foreign goods, and that's good for you. It's good for you because the more products you can choose from, you're likely to get the product you want at higher quality and better price. That's how the market works. So what I'm telling places like China is, you treat us the way we treat you. (Applause.) See, the best policy is to level the playing field, because Americans can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere so long as the rules are fair. (Applause.)To make sure jobs are here in America, to make sure people can find work, we've got to be wise about how we spend your money and keep your taxes low. (Applause.) Taxes are an issue in this campaign. See, I'm running against a fellow who has already promised over $2 trillion of new money, new federal programs, so far.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: We've got -- there's going to be a lot of temptations coming down the pike to tell everybody everywhere what they want to hear. That means -- that generally means spending your money. But the problem is, he hasn't told us how he's going to spend -- pay for it. See, he said, oh, don't worry, we'll pay for it by taxing the rich. Two things wrong with that. One is, you can't raise enough money by taxing the rich to pay for $2 trillion worth of new programs. See, there's a gap between his promise and what he can deliver, and guess who's going to get stuck with the bill? Secondly, you've heard that rhetoric before, haven't you? Oh, don't worry, we'll just tax the rich. Well, the rich hire accountants and lawyers, and you get stuck with the bill. We're not going to let him tax you. We're going to win a great victory in November. (Applause.)And speaking about the tax code, we're going to do something about our tax code in a second term. We're going to make it easier to understand and we're going to simplify it. This tax code of ours is too complicated. It is filled with special interest loopholes. Americans spend about six billion hours a year on taxes because of the complicated nature of the tax code. The tax code is a drag on our economy. In a new term, I'll bring Republicans and Democrats together to simplify the federal tax code. (Applause.)Listen, this world of ours is changing, and the nature of the jobs are changing. And we've got to help workers gain the skills necessary so they can fill the jobs of the 21st century. That's why I'm such a big believer in improving access to the community colleges all across our country. I remember coming to the community college here in Huntington, West Virginia. We talked about job training. We talked about people having the skills necessary to fill the jobs which are being created. And we got to do a better job in our high schools. Do you realize that about -- most of the new jobs, over 50 percent of the new jobs require at least two years of college, and yet, one in four of our students gets there?That's why we've got to fund early intervention programs in high schools to help students who are at risk. We want to place a new focus on math and science in our high schools. We want to require a rigorous exam -- over time, require a rigorous exam before graduation. See, by raising performance in high schools, and by expanding Pell grants for low- and middle-income families, we will help more Americans start their career with a college diploma. (Applause.)We'll do more to make quality health care available and affordable. More than one-half of the uninsured are small business employees and their families. Small businesses are having trouble affording health care. One way to help small businesses afford health care, and therefore, help families, is to allow them to join together to purchase insurance at the discounts big companies get. (Applause.) We'll help more people own and manage their own health care plans. We'll expand health savings accounts. We'll ensure every poor county in America has a community or rural health center so people can get the primary care they need. And we're going to do something about these junk lawsuits that are running good docs out of practice and running up your costs. (Applause.)One reason small businesses are having trouble affording health care is because these lawsuits are running up the cost of medicine. Make no mistake about it; junk lawsuits are running up your costs. And make no mistake about it; too many good docs are being run out of practice. And that's harmful. It's harmful for the folks in Ohio, West Virginia, Kentucky, and all across America. You cannot be pro-doctor, pro-patient, pro-hospital and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice -- I'm for medical liability reform now. (Applause.) In all we do to improve health care in America, we will make sure that health decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)In a changing world, ownership brings stability to people 's lives. One of the most hopeful statistics in recent times is the fact that home ownership rates are at an all-time high in America. More and more people are owning their home. In a new term, we'll continue to expand ownership all across this country. We want more and more people opening the door of the place where they live and saying, welcome to my home, welcome to my piece of property. (Applause.)And we want to make sure our younger workers have got a Social Security system that's viable. Now, let me say, if you're an older worker or you're dependent now on Social Security, you're going to be just fine. If you're a baby boomer, you'll be just fine when it comes to Social Security as it's now structured. But I think we need to think about our children and our grandchildren when it comes to Social Security. (Applause.) It's one thing for people like Zell and me to say it's going to be fine for us; we have an obligation to see that it's fine for younger folks. And so, therefore, I think younger workers who are coming up ought to have the right to take some of their own tax money and put it in an account they can call their own, a personal savings account that will help them with Social Security. (Applause.)In a world of change some things don't change, the values we try to live by -- courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. In a time of change we'll support the institutions that give our lives direction and purpose -- our families, our schools, our religious congregations. (Applause.) We believe -- we stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every being counts. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of society. (Applause.) We stand for the Second Amendment which gives every American the individual right to bear arms. (Applause.) And I stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. Since the terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth -- not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. (Applause.) Our strategy is clear: We're defending the homeland, we're transforming our military, we're strengthening our intelligence services. We're staying on the offensive. We're striking the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.) We will work -- we will continue our work to advance freedom in the broader Middle East and around the world, and we will prevail. (Applause.)Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, four short years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was seriously pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we acted, the government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs -- (applause.) The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice. (Applause.) We have led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)The progress involved careful diplomacy, clear moral purpose, and some tough decisions. The toughest came on Iraq. We knew Saddam Hussein's record of aggression and support for terror. We knew he had a long history of pursuing and even using weapons of mass destruction. And we know that after September the 11th, our country must think differently. We must take the threats seriously before they fully materialize. (Applause.)In Saddam Hussein, we saw a threat. I went to the United States Congress. Members of both Houses and both political parties looked at the same intelligence I looked at. They remembered the same history I remembered. They came to the same conclusion that my administration came to, Saddam Hussein was a threat, and they authorized the use of force. (Applause.) My opponent -- my opponent looked at the very same intelligence I looked at. And he came to the same conclusion then that we had come to, that Saddam Hussein was a threat. He authorized -- he voted to authorize the use of force.Before the Commander-in-Chief commits troops into harm's way, we must try all options in order to solve the threat. And that's why I went to the United Nations. I was hoping that diplomacy would work. The United Nations looked at the same intelligence we looked at, they remembered the same history we remembered, and they came to the conclusion that Saddam Hussein must disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences. (Applause.) So the world spoke with a 15-to-nothing vote in the Security Council. But Saddam Hussein wasn't interested in what the world had to say. He hadn't been interested over the past decade, and he certainly wasn't interested now. He ignored the demands of the free world. As a matter of fact, when the U.N. decided to send inspectors into the country, he systematically deceived them. In other words, he wasn't about to comply.So I had a choice to make at this point in time: Do I take the word of a madman, forget the lessons of September the 11th, or take action to defend America? Given that -- given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: Because we acted -- because we acted to defend ourselves, 50 million people now live in freedom. (Applause.) Because we upheld doctrine, because the most solemn duty of government is to defend the security of the people of this country, 50 million people now in Afghanistan and Iraq are free. Think about Afghanistan for a minute. Think about Afghanistan for a minute. This is a country, not all that long ago, where young girls weren't allowed to go to school, and their mothers were taken into the public square and whipped if they didn't toe the line of the Taliban. The Taliban was backward and barbaric in their vision. They're the opposite of what we stand for in America. They didn't believe in religious freedom, they didn't believe in political freedom, they didn't believe in freedom. Today, over 10 million Afghan men and women -- 10 million citizens, over 40 percent of whom are women, have registered to vote for the upcoming presidential election. (Applause.) It's amazing.Freedom is powerful, isn't it? (Applause.) In Iraq, it's still tough there. But Iraq now has a strong Prime Minister, a national council, and national elections will be held in January. (Applause.)The world is changing. Our nation is standing with the people of those countries, because when America gives it's word, it must keep it's word. (Applause.) We're standing with those people in the country -- in those countries, and as we do so, we're serving a historic cause that will make our country safer and make the world more peaceful, something we all want. See, free societies in the Middle East will be hopeful societies which no longer feed resentments and breed violence for export. A free Iraq and a free Afghanistan will serve as a powerful example for those who long for freedom in a part of the world that is desperate for freedom. (Applause.)So our mission in Afghanistan and Iraq is clear. We'll help the new leaders. We'll help them head down the road to democracy. We'll help them hold elections. More importantly, we'll train Afghan and Iraqi citizens for police and their armies so they can do the hard work of defending their countries -- their fellow countrymen from the designs and demands of a few terrorists. We'll help them provide -- we'll provide those countries with stability as quickly as we can get the job done. And then our troops will return home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)I'm proud of our military. We've got a great United States military. (Applause.) I've had the privilege of meeting with those who wear the nation's uniform. I've met them all across bases here in America and around the world. I'm telling you, I've seen their unselfish courage, their great decency. I appreciate the veterans who are here today who have set such a great example for those who wear the uniform today. (Applause.) I appreciate the military families who are here today. (Applause.)I made a commitment to those who wear the uniform and their families that they will have the resources they need to complete their missions. So I went to the Congress a year ago and proposed supplemental funding of $87 billion. It's really important funding because it provided body armor, spare parts, ammunition, fuel, supplies needed by our troops who were in harm's way in Iraq and Afghanistan. I appreciate Senator Miller's strong support for that funding request. (Applause.) We received strong bipartisan support. The support was so strong that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against this important funding -- two of whom were my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: In fact, only four United States senators voted to authorize the use of force, and then voted against funding our troops -- two of those senators were my opponent and his running mate. They asked him to explain his vote. It was right here in Huntington, West Virginia where he said, I voted for the $87 billion right before I voted against it. Right here in Huntington. They kept pressing him after that, and he said, well, he was proud of his vote. And finally he just said the whole thing was a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)When it comes to Iraq, my opponent has more different positions than all his colleagues in the Senate combined. (Laughter.) Senator Kerry once said, ""It would be naive to the point of grave danger not to believe that, left to his own devises, Saddam Hussein will provoke, misjudge or stumble into a future of more dangerous confrontation with the civilized world."" End quote. In 2002, he voted for the war. But then he voted against body armor and combat pay for our troops. When the heat got on in the Democrat primary, he declared himself the anti-war candidate. Then several months later, he said he would have still voted to go to war, even knowing everything we know today. Earlier this week, he adopted the language of his one-time rival, Howard Dean, saying it's the wrong war at the wrong time -- even though he, earlier, said it was the right decision and he supported it.The newest wrinkle is that Senator Kerry has now decided we are spending too much money in Iraq, even though he criticized us earlier for not spending enough. One thing about Senator Kerry's position is clear: If he had his way, Saddam Hussein would still be in power and would still be a threat to the security and to the world. (Applause.)In our next four years, we'll continue to work with our friends and allies to make us more secure and to make them more secure, and to make the world more peaceful. We put together a broad coalition, about 40 nations in Afghanistan, and some 30 in Iraq. But I'll assure you this: I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. The wisest use of American strength is to advance freedom. I spent time with Prime Minister Koizumi. He's the Prime Minister of Japan. You know, I was having dinner with him one evening, and it dawned on me how remarkable it is that an American President could be talking about working together to make the world a better place. After all, it wasn't all that long ago in the march of history that we were at war with Japan. They were our sworn enemy. My dad, I'm sure your dads and grandads, fought against the Japanese. And yet, right after World War II, after we were victorious, Harry Truman and other Americans never abandoned this notion that freedom could change societies. And they stood the line. There was a lot of skeptics in those days. I can understand why. We were just at war with them. You can imagine why a lot of American people said, why are we wasting our time? Why do we care?Well, people did care. See, they cared because they had a vision of the future. And because they worked to help Japan become a democracy, today Japan is an ally. Prime Minister Koizumi and I sit around the table talking about the peace. We're talking about using our influence to make the world a better place, not only for the people in our own country, but for people around the world. We talk about peace in North Korea. We talk about peace in Iraq. We talk about feeding the hungry. (Applause.)Liberty -- liberty can change countries from enemies to friend. Someday, an American President will be sitting down with a duly-elected leader of Iraq, and they're going to be talking about the peace. They'll be talking about a better world. See, liberty has got the chance to make this world a more peaceful place. I believe that millions in the Middle East plead in silence for their liberty. I believe that if given the chance, they will embrace the most honorable form of government ever devised by man. And I believe these things not because freedom is America's gift to the world, but because freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)This young century will be liberty's century. By promoting freedom here at home and freedom abroad, we'll build a safer world and a more hopeful America. By reforming systems of government, we will free more Americans to be able to realize their dreams. We'll spread ownership and opportunity to every corner of this country. We'll pass the enduring values of our country to a new generation. We will continue to lead the world to become more free and more peaceful.You know, for all Americans, these years in our history will stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. This is a time -- this is a time when we need firm resolve, clear vision, and a deep faith in the values that make this a great nation. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. I met a fellow behind the stage here who was at Ground Zero the same day I was at Ground Zero. He was there to save lives; I was there to thank people for saving lives -- so on September the 14th, 2001, that -- both of us were in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I will never forget. I told him that. I said, it's a day that I'll never forget. There were workers in hard hats yelling at me at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes."" I tried to do my best to comfort those who had been in the rubble. A fellow looked me right in the eye and said, ""Do not let me down."" I wake up -- (applause) -- I wake up every morning, every morning, thinking about how to better protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago, when I traveled our great country asking for the vote, I made a pledge to my fellow Americans that if you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, with your hard work, I will do so for four more years.God bless. Thank you for coming. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"Thank you all for coming. Thank you all very much. (Applause.) Please be seated. Thank you all for coming. Thanks for the welcome. It's good to be back in Pennsylvania. (Applause.) Again. It just seems like I was here yesterday. (Laughter.) I was. (Laughter.) Kind of. But I'm glad to be here. I really appreciate you coming  out. Spirits are high. I'm feeling great about life. (Applause.)I really appreciate being here at Byers Choice. (Applause.) Thank you all for your hospitality. You sure know how to make a President feel welcome. (Applause.) We're here because I want to talk about the economy some, and a plan to keep this economy moving forward so people can realize their dreams. And it's such a wonderful place to come because the entrepreneurial spirit here is strong.This is a company that was formed by Bob and Joyce Byers -- (audience interruption) --AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We are here -- I appreciate you coming to Byers. (Laughter and applause.) It's such an honor to meet Bob and Joyce Byers. They are -- they had a dream and they wanted to build a small company into a large company, and they've done so. They started their company in the 1960s. They found a good idea -- they thought of the idea. Government didn't think of the idea, they did. (Applause.) They decided to take risk. They hired people wisely, they invested wisely, and their company is growing. And I appreciate the contribution they made. (Applause.)They've got a fantastic customer base, because they -- (audience interruption.)AUDIENCE: Booo! Four more years! Four more years! Four more years! (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: We are here because the entrepreneurial spirit is strong, because there is an optimism in this room that says it can remain stronger. (Applause.) The Byers have got a significant customer base, which means they understand how to run a business. And my mother is one of their customers. (Laughter and applause.)And so what we're going to talk about today is our economy, and how to keep it growing, and how to make sure the entrepreneurial spirit is strong so people can realize their dreams. Today I want to discuss with you the plan I have to keep us on the path to growth and opportunity, a plan that I'm convinced that when Americans listen to, they'll put me and Dick Cheney back in office for four more years. (Applause.)So I told Laura I was coming here, and she said, ""Give everybody my best."" (Applause.) She's great. She's a fantastic mom and a great wife. She is a wonderful First Lady. (Applause.) So when I asked her to marry me, she said, ""Fine, just so long as I don't have to give any political speeches."" (Laughter.) I said, okay, you won't have to give a speech. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that promise. She gave a great speech the other night. (Applause.) People got to see her heart and her compassion.I appreciate Congressman Jim Greenwood a lot. I must confess to you that when I heard he was retiring, I got a little mad at him, because I've enjoyed working with him. He is a good, decent, honorable man. And I appreciate you. (Applause.) I appreciate the fact that Arlen Specter is with us today. I hope you put him back into office for six more years. (Applause.) There he is. I enjoy working with Arlen. He's a good, independent thinker, and he's a good -- fine United States senator. And we'll work well together during the next four years.I want to thank Pat Toomey for joining us today, as well. He's a class act. (Applause.) I appreciate -- I told this to Pat on Air Force One, I said, I appreciate the way he handled himself after a tough primary. He's coming together, he's working for the ticket, and that shows what kind of guy he is. And I'm honored you're here, Pat. (Applause.)Where is Mayor Joe? Mr. Mayor. Thank you for coming, Mr. Mayor. I'm proud you're here. (Applause.) Yeah! I always like to stay in touch with the local power. (Laughter.) Sure enough, there he is. Thanks for coming, Mayor. I appreciate you being here.Mike Fitzpatrick is with us today. I appreciate you coming, Mike. (Applause.) Appreciate you being here. Tom Corbett is with us today. Appreciate you coming, Tom. Good luck. (Applause.) I want to thank all the candidates who are here, and the grassroots activists. I'm traveling your state and traveling the country to ask people not only for the vote, but for the help. And I hope you go register voters, find people to show up to the polls. We have a duty in America to vote and -- (applause.) So thanks for the work you're doing. And when you get them to the polls, headed to the polls, remind them, if they want a safer America, a stronger America, and a better America, to put me and Dick Cheney back in there. (Applause.)Eunice Sanchez is with us -- where are you, Eunice? There she is. Thanks. And you've got your son and daughter -- thanks for coming. I met Eunice. She works for the Amachi mentoring program in Philadelphia. I don't know if you've heard of Amachi. I have been fortunate enough to be briefed by the people that run that program. Amachi is a mentoring program for children with incarcerated parents. I want you to think about what this good American citizen does. She takes time out of her life to mentor a child to show there's love, the possibility of love. I tell the people of this country that the great strength of our country is the hearts and souls of the American citizens. That's really the true strength of America. And the reason I've asked -- (applause.) And the reason that Eunice has kindly come today is for me to hold her up as an example for others -- for others to recognize that they can help change America, one heart and one soul at a time, as well; that our society is a compassionate society because people from all walks of life put their arm around somebody who hurts and says, I love you, and what can I do to help you. (Applause.)I appreciate you coming, Eunice. God bless you, and thanks for coming. (Applause.)I'm looking forward to this -- I'm looking forward to the campaign. I'm -- there's some things I want to do for the next four years. (Laughter.) And I'm looking forward to telling the people of the country where I stand and where I believe and where I'm going to lead the country. I'm running with a clear and positive plan to build a safer world and a more hopeful America. (Applause.) I'm running with what I call a compassionate conservative philosophy, that government should help people improve their lives, not try to run their lives. (Applause.)I believe it's the job of a President to confront problems, not to pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. (Applause.) In the last four years we have confronted economic problems. We have got some short-term challenges that came from an economic downturn and a national emergency. We've got some long-term challenges because our economy is changing. In all these areas, we've acted, and we're moving forward. Today I want to talk to you about some of the plans we have.Remember the history. When you're out rounding up the vote, remind the people what we have been through. When Dick Cheney and I took office in January -- on January 20th of 2001, our economy was heading into a recession, and the stock market had been declining for five months prior to our arrival. Our nation faced some corporate scandals that cost people jobs and savings and shook our confidence. Today, it is absolutely clear that we're not going to tolerate dishonesty in the board rooms of America. (Applause.)America was attacked. Our economy lost nearly a million jobs after that attack in just three months. We acted with a clear strategy. We unleashed the energy and innovative spirit of America with the largest tax relief in a generation. (Applause.) The tax relief provided small business owners the resources and incentives they need to expand and grow and hire more workers. The entrepreneurial spirit is strong, the small business sector of our economy is strong, and the tax relief helped strengthen it. (Applause.)We encouraged savings and investment by cutting taxes on dividends and capital gains. (Applause.) Tax relief put money in the hands of American workers, so they could save for their retirement or for their home, or for the education of their children. My philosophy is, government sets priorities, funds its priorities, and lets the people keep as much money as possible. I think you can spend your money better than the federal government can. (Applause.)We increased the child credit and reduced the marriage penalty. The tax code ought to encourage marriage, not discourage marriage. (Applause.) And the results are clear. Our country has now seen 12 straight months of job gains. Over the past year, we've added 1.7 million jobs. That is more than Germany, Japan, Great Britain, Canada and France combined. (Applause.) Unemployment is down to 5.4 percent. That is nearly a full point below the rate in the summer of 2003, and it is below the average of the 1970s, the 1980s and the 1990s. (Applause.)Interest rates and mortgage rates are near historic lows. Our economy is growing at rates as fast as any in the last 20 years. The manufacturing sector is improving. When I took office, manufacturing employment had been declining for almost three years. In the last six months of the prior administration, more than 200,000 manufacturing jobs were lost. We're turning that around. (Applause.) Since January, America has added 107,000 manufacturing jobs, including 22,000 last month alone. We are making steady progress for American workers. (Applause.)Because of tax relief, the middle class is paying less in federal taxes. The average family of four with an income of $40,000 got nearly a $2,000 tax cut. (Applause.) Real after-tax incomes are up almost 10 percent since December of 2000. (Applause.) People have got more money in their pockets because of the tax relief. (Applause.) Our economy is stronger because people are keeping more of what they earn. (Applause.)Listen, we also face long-term challenges in this economy. The workers of our parents' generation typically had one job, one skill, one career, often with one company that provided health care and a pension. That's the way it used to be. This world of ours is changing. By the way, most of those workers were men. Today, workers change jobs, even careers, many times during their lives. And in one of the most dramatic shifts our society has seen, two-thirds of all moms also work outside the home. This world of ours has changed. And yet, the institutions of government haven't changed.Let me tell you what else has changed. Productivity has grown faster over the last three years than any time in more than 40 years -- in part because technology is changing the way we do things. You'd rather use a computer than a typewriter. You'd rather use a backhoe than a shovel. (Laughter.) That's productivity. But it also means that the same work can be done by fewer workers. And that creates a problem for someone looking for a job. That's why manufacturing still produces roughly the same share of our GDP, but with a smaller share of the work force. So these are some long-term challenges we face.But it's a time of great opportunity. A time of change creates great opportunity -- so long as the government takes the side of the workers and the families here in America; so long as government -- (applause) -- so long as government recognizes this: our fundamental systems -- the tax code, health coverage, pension plans, and worker training -- were created for the world of yesterday -- think about that -- not for tomorrow. I believe in the next four years, we've got to transform these systems to help our citizens, to help prepare our citizens, to help free citizens so they can realize the great dream of our country.And so you'll hear me talk a lot about changing systems to help people -- not increasing government to stifle dreams. (Applause.) Obviously -- obviously, in order for people to realize their dreams, there has to be robust economic growth. In order to make sure that the productivity increases don't cause people not to be able to find a job, we got to grow this economy. And that's what I want to talk to you about right quick, a plan to make sure we continue to create jobs here in America.First of all, in order to have jobs here, America must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.) If you want people working here, it's got to be the best -- the best place to risk capital, the best place to expand, the best place to realize dreams. One way to make sure it's the best place to do business is to reduce the regulatory burden on small businesses. (Applause.) You fill out a lot of paperwork if you're a small business owner in America. I can't promise you anybody in government ever reads it. (Laughter.)We want jobs here in the Philadelphia area. We want to make sure the manufacturing sector is robust. Congress needs to get an energy plan to my desk now. I submitted a plan two years ago. It's a plan that encourages conservation, expands renewables, uses clean coal technologies. Listen, we must become less dependent on foreign sources of energy if we want jobs to remain in America. (Applause.)In order to keep jobs here, so people can realize their dreams, we must open up markets for U.S. products. Listen, we've opened up our markets. And it's good for consumers we've opened up our markets. If you have more choices in the marketplace, you're likely to get the product you want at a better price and better quality. And so what I'm saying to countries like China is, treat us the way we treat you. I believe American farmers and manufacturers and business owners can compete with anybody, anywhere, anytime -- so long as the rules are fair. (Applause.) What we will do is reject economic isolationism. Economic isolationism will hurt America's workers.In order to make sure we create jobs here, we've got to do something about these junk lawsuits that threaten employers. (Applause.) I believe strongly in legal reform, because I understand personal injury lawyers should not get richer at the expense of hardworking Americans and American entrepreneurs. (Applause.)Finally, in order to keep jobs here, we've got to be wise about how we spend your money and keep your taxes low. Running up the taxes on the entrepreneurs in America is bad economic policy. (Applause.) I told you there's some systems that need to change. One system that needs to change is the federal tax code. (Applause.) It is too cumbersome. I tried to hold it the other day -- (laughter) -- when I was campaigning in Missouri. I'm in pretty good shape. It was hard to hold it. (Laughter.) It's got a million words in it. It takes the American people six billion hours a year, every year, to file these forms. It is full of special interest loopholes. For the sake of economic growth and for the sake of fairness, we need to change the tax code. We need to make it simple and easy to understand. (Applause.)A changing world means that the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century are changing, and it's something we've got to recognize. And a changing economy is one that creates new opportunities. But sometimes there's a skills gap. And that's why I believe we ought to expand access to our community college systems, to make sure that the workers have the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century.As well, most new jobs in a changing -- this changing world, require two years of college. Yet only one in four of our students gets there. And so we need early intervention programs in our high schools to solve problems early, before they're too late. We need to have new focus on math and science. As the No Child Left Behind Act begins to fill the education pipeline with good readers, we will require a rigorous exam before graduation from high school. See, what I'm telling you is, by raising performance in high schools and expanding Pell grants for low- and middle-income families, we will help more Americans start their career with a college diploma. (Applause.)These are changing times, and our economy is changing. And there are communities around where manufacturing, textiles and other jobs no longer exist. There are poor communities in our country that need help, as well. And that's why, the other night at the convention, I announced American opportunity zones. These zones will provide tax relief and other incentives for new businesses to be created, and to improve housing and job training and bringing hope. In other words, in changing times, there are ways to help communities that have suffered during changing times, with good tax policy, good regulation policy and good housing policy. (Applause.)Listen, in order to make sure jobs stay here, we've got to do something about health care. We need to make sure health care is available and affordable. Do you realize more than half the uninsured are employees of small businesses? Small businesses are having trouble affording health care. One way to help small businesses afford health care is to allow small firms to join together to purchase insurance at the discounts available to big companies. (Applause.)We will offer tax credits to encourage small businesses and their employees to set up health savings accounts. We'll provide direct help for low-income Americans to purchase health savings accounts. These accounts give workers the security of insurance against major illness, the opportunity to save tax-free for routine health expenses, and the freedom of knowing you can take your account with you whenever you change jobs or careers. (Applause.) I'm a big believer in community and rural health centers. These are facilities where low-income Americans can get primary care. I believe every poor country in America ought to have one of these facilities in order to take the pressure off emergency rooms around the United States. (Applause.)In order to make sure health care is available and affordable, we've got to do something about the frivolous lawsuits that are running good doctors out of practice and running up your health care costs. (Applause.) I appreciate working with Jim Greenwood on this issue. He figured it out, and I hope the people of this country figure it out. These frivolous lawsuits are making it awfully hard for a lot of docs to practice medicine. You're losing good docs. Greenwood was telling me about the doctor that saved his dad's life had to leave practice because his premiums were too high. Many doctors, in order to avoid litigation, practice defensive medicine. In other words, they run up the costs of health care so if the ever get caught -- pulled in front of a court of law, they've got a defense. It's costing the taxpayers about $28 billion a year, the defensive practice of medicine costs $28 billion a year. We have a national problem, and it requires a national solution. (Applause.) I've submitted legislation that Greenwood got passed in the House. It's stuck in the Senate because the trial lawyers are powerful in the United States Senate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: See, I don't think -- I don't think you can be pro-doctor, pro-patient, and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. I think you have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. (Applause.) I made my choice -- I made my choice: I am for medical liability reform -- now. (Applause.)I'm looking forward to the debate on health care. I'm looking forward to it. In all we do to improve health care in America, we'll make sure that health decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)Our labor laws need to change. We got a lot of moms who are now in the workplace. And yet, it's really hard for moms to find enough time to do their duty as moms, see, because the rules -- the labor laws are stuck in the past. I think we need to have flex-time and comp-time to allow families to be able to have more quality time. (Applause.)In a changing world, ownership can bring stability to your life. One of the most hopeful statistics of the last year or two has been that the home ownership rate is at an all-time high in America. There's more minority families who are opening up the door where they live, and say, welcome to my home; come in to my house. (Applause.) It's a really important part of a future, when more and more people can own their home. We've got a plan to encourage home ownership in this country.And we've got to make sure that our pension systems work, the Social Security system works. If you're an older American, nothing will change -- the Social Security trust will fulfill its promise to you. If you're a baby boomer, we're in pretty good shape when it comes to receiving the promise of Social Security. But we need to worry about our children and grandchildren when it comes to Social Security. I believe younger workers ought to be able to take some of their taxes and set up a personal savings account, to make sure the Social Security promise that's made to them -- (applause) -- an account that they can call their own, an account that government cannot take away, and an account that they can pass on from one generation to the next. (Applause.)In these proposals, we seek not to provide a government program, but a greater path to opportunity, and more freedom for you to decide what's best for your life, and therefore, I believe, more opportunity for every citizen. And we got a choice in this race. I mean, it's a clear choice. See, I believe our opponent's philosophy is very different from ours. If you carefully listen, he wants to expand government. Listen to the proposals. That's what he wants to do. What we want to do is expand opportunity. He wants to give more power to Washington by raising taxes and spending more money. And he's got a record to match his promises. (Laughter.)Over two decades in Washington, he has voted for higher income taxes, higher taxes on Social Security benefits. That's part of his record. He repeatedly voted for higher taxes on small businesses, higher taxes on gasoline. He voted against tax relief for married couples, for increasing the child credit, and against expanding tax-free retirement savings. We have a difference of opinion when it comes to taxation. If you drive a car, Senator Kerry has voted for higher taxes on you. If you have a job, he's voted for higher taxes on you. If you're married, or have children, he's voted for higher taxes on you. The good news is, on the 2nd of November, you have a chance to vote. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: There is a reason for supporting higher taxes -- because he wants to dramatically increase government spending. It's part of his platform. On the campaign trail, he's proposed more than $2 trillion in new federal spending, so far. (Laughter.) And we still have 54 more days to go. Now, he says he's going to pay for all that by raising taxes on the wealthiest 2 percent of the population. There's just one problem with that. My opponent's tax increases would bring only about $650 billion in revenue over the next 10 years, see. And he wants to spend over $2 trillion. So you do the math. (Laughter.) The plan leaves him more than $1.4 trillion short. And guess who would wind up paying the bill?Now, one of his key economic advisors -- one of my opponent's key economic advisors is saying they won't give the details on how they would raise spending and lower the deficit until after the election. (Laughter.) Well, if they want to hold back information until the people vote, you can bet it won't be good news for the taxpayers. But America will reject the hidden Kerry tax plan. (Applause.)Raising taxes will be bad for our economy. Raising taxes will be bad for the small business sector of America. And I'll tell you why -- 90 percent of small business owners pay tax at the individual income tax level. Ninety percent of small business owners are sub-chapter S corporations or sole proprietorship. Byers Choice is a sub-chapter S corporation. Now, if you're organized as a sub-chapter S or sole proprietorship, when you pay your tax, you fill out the individual income tax forms. And so when you talk about raising the top two brackets in the individual taxes, you're talking about taxing companies like Byers Choice. I don't see -- and by the way, 70 percent of new jobs in America are created by small businesses. Why does it make sense to tax the job creators? It doesn't make sense to tax the job creators. (Applause.)Bob said this -- he said, ""that would hurt my company."" When he heard the plan to raise taxes to pay for promises, political promises, he said, ""That would hurt my company. It would cut off jobs I plan to create."" My opponent, by making political promises and by promising to tax small businesses such as Byers Choice, would hurt our economy. I believe in order to continue economic growth, we need an energy plan, good trade policy, good regulatory policy, good legal policy, good health policy, and we need to make the tax relief permanent. (Applause.)In order to make sure we have sustained economic growth, we will also continue to protect the homeland over the next four years. (Applause.) A lot of good people working hard on your behalf. And we reorganized the department -- departments to create the Department of Homeland Security so we can better talk to each other, better respond to crisis, better deal with emergency, better share intelligence. And we're getting better in Washington, D.C. about doing what is necessary to protect you. And there's a lot of good people working hard to do so. (Applause.) And I appreciate it.As the 9/11 Commission said, America is safer, but not yet safe. I agree. And so you just got to know there's some fine people at all levels of government working hard. But the best way to protect the homeland is to stay on the offensive, is to find the terrorists -- (applause.) You cannot talk sense to these people. You've seen how they behave. You saw the attacks of September the 11th. You saw what happened to those Russian schoolchildren. America must continue to lead the world. We will find them overseas so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)We're making progress. We're making progress. Three-quarters of al Qaeda's known leadership has been brought to justice. Because we upheld doctrine that said if you harbor a terrorist, you're equally as guilty as the terrorists, the Taliban are no longer in power in Afghanistan. Think about the progress in Afghanistan. It wasn't all that long ago that young girls weren't allow to go to school, and their moms would be pulled in a public square and whipped if they didn't toe the line of these barbaric people. And today, Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. Over 10 million citizens have registered to vote in the upcoming presidential election. (Applause.) Amazing, isn't it? Freedom is on the march in Afghanistan, and that's good for America.In Iraq, we removed a sworn enemy of America who had ties to terror and used weapons of mass destruction. Listen, I recognize we didn't find the stockpiles we all thought were there -- all of us thought were there. (Applause.) But -- but remember Saddam Hussein had the capability of making weapons. He could have passed that capability on to the enemy. And that's not a risk we could afford to take after September the 11th. (Applause.) Knowing what I know today, I would have made the same decision. (Applause.) America -- America and the world are safer with Saddam in a prison cell.We're making progress there. I'm impressed -- I'm impressed by Prime Minister Allawi. He's a strong guy who believes that democracy is the future of Iraq, and he's got hard work to do. It wasn't all that long ago that people were brutalized by Saddam Hussein. But we're making progress. There will be elections in January of next year. It's amazing when you think about it -- they've gone from tyranny to elections in a brief period of time. (Applause.)Our goal -- our goal in Iraq is to -- like it is in Afghanistan, is to help provide enough stability so the political process can move forward; is to train Iraqis and Afghan citizens so they can do the hard work of defending their country against the few who want to thwart the desires of the many; is to put those countries on the path to stability and democracy as quickly as possible, and then bring our troops home. (Applause.)I'm oftentimes asked what I tell those who -- the loved ones of those who lost their life in combat. I tell them this: I say, your son or daughter or wife or husband is serving during historic times. These are times that will help make this world a more peaceful place. It's a time for little children to be able to -- when we get it right -- for children to grow up in a peaceful world. I tell them that in order to honor their memory, we will complete the mission. (Applause.)I say this -- I believe in the power of liberty to transform lives. That's what I believe. The core of my belief is that liberty has got the incredible capacity to convert enemies to friends, tyrannical societies to free societies. And that makes the world more peaceful, a peace we all want.You know, I tell people about my meetings with Prime Minister Koizumi, the Prime Minister of Japan, who is the Prime Minister of a country that my dad fought against, your dads and grandfathers fought against. They were the sworn enemy of America some 60 years ago. And today I sit down at the table with him to discuss peace. He's an ally in peace. And I'm able to do so because my predecessor, Harry Truman, and other American citizens believed that the enemy could become a friend if democracy took hold in Japan.Now, there was a lot of skeptics and doubters during those days, and you can understand why -- we'd just been fighting these people. But because they believed in the power of liberty to transform lives, they helped Japan develop a self-governing democracy. And today Japan is an ally when it comes to keeping the peace. The Prime Minister and I talk about North Korea, we talk about Iraq, we talk about humanitarian needs around the world. Someday an American President will be sitting down with a duly elected leader of Iraq, and they're going to be talking about the peace, and they're going to look back in history, and say, thank goodness America never forgot the power of liberty -- (applause) -- the power of liberty to change lives. (Applause.)I want to thank you all for giving me a chance to come by today. As you can see, I've got a plan to continue growing this economy, so people can realize their hopes and dreams; that I know what needs to be done whenit comes to securing this homeland and winning the war on terror; that I believe strongly in the values that make us a great nation; and that, with your help, we're going to win Pennsylvania and win a great election in November. (Applause.)God bless. Thank you all for coming. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008," Thank you all. Thanks for coming. (Applause.) I'm glad to be here, celebrating Labor Day with you. (Applause.) It's good to be in a part of the world where the cowboy hats outnumber the ties. (Applause.) Thanks for coming. You know, you might have heard I got an interesting invitation to come here to Poplar Bluff, Missouri. (Applause.) I get a lot of invitations. I've never gotten one with 10,000 signatures on it. (Applause.) But I was somewhat surprised when we choppered over here, because it looks like there's  a lot more people than 10,000 that have come today. (Applause.)Thanks for coming. Thanks for having me. It's a beautiful part of the world. People are good people here. I'm proud to be here, to ask for your vote. (Applause.) You sure know how to make a President feel welcome. (Applause.)And I know you will join me in wishing President Clinton the very best wishes in the recovery from his surgery. (Applause.) His surgery went well, which is good news. And we just pray for a speedy recovery for the former President. (Applause.)My one regret today is I wish Laura were here to see the size of this crowd. (Applause.) You know, she was a public school librarian when I asked her to marry me. She was working at an elementary school, and she said, ""Fine, I'll marry you, so long as I never have to give a political speech."" (Laughter.) I said, ""Okay."" (Laughter.) Fortunately, it's not a promise she held me to. She gave a fantastic speech. (Applause.) She's a great mom. She is a wonderful wife. She is a great First Lady. I'm going to give you some reasons to put me back in, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura is First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: I'm proud to be running for a second term with my friend, Dick Cheney. (Applause.) He doesn't have the -- he doesn't have the waviest hair in the race. (Laughter.) I didn't pick him for his hairdo. (Laughter.) I picked him because he has good judgment, great experience, and he can get the job done. (Applause.)I appreciate my friend, Jo Ann Emerson, the fine Congresswoman from this district. (Applause.) She's a pleasure to work with. Every time I see her, she says, ""Remember Missouri."" (Applause.) And so does your Senator, Kit Bond. I'm proud to be here with Kit. (Applause.) I'm asking you to put me back in there, but make sure, as you do, put him in, too. He's a great United States Senator. (Applause.) Give him six more years. (Applause.)And Jim Talent, Jim Talent is a fine senator, as well. (Applause.) As they say down in Crawford, he's making a good hand. (Laughter.) Smart guy, good, honest man. I appreciate being with him. It's good to be here with your next governor, Matt Blunt. (Applause.) I appreciate my friend, Peter Kinder here. He's representing the state senate. (Applause.) It looks like his cousin came. (Laughter.) House Speaker, Catherine Hanaway is with us. I'm proud you're here. (Applause.)I want to thank Mayor Lloyd Matthews. Mr. Mayor, thank you so very much for this very generous and kind introduction -- invitation to be here. It means a lot. And I also want to thank Hardy Billington and David Hahn. (Applause.) These are local veterans -- these boys sure know how to throw a party. (Applause.) I want to thank the Sho-Me Marching Band. (Applause.) Thank you all for coming. Poplar Bluff High School, I appreciate you all being here.Most of all, I want to thank you all for coming on Labor Day. It means a lot. Well, I'm glad to be here. (Applause.) But I'm not only asking for the vote, I'm asking for your help. I think it's really important in our society to vote. I believe in a free society, we have an obligation to participate in our elections.So I'm asking you to register your friends and neighbors. Don't overlook discerning Democrats; people like Zell Miller. (Applause.) Zell Miller knows. There's a lot of good Democrats in this part of the world that understand that Dick Cheney and I will make this world safer, stronger and better for every single American. (Applause.) And if you're a Democrat or independent, you're welcome here. We're glad you're here.And then when you get people heading to the polls, after you register them, get them leaning our way. Get them to come our way. (Applause.) I want to thank you for your help, I want to thank you for what you're going to do, coming down the stretch run. There's no doubt in my mind, with your help, we'll carry Missouri again and win the big election in November of '04. (Applause.)I'm looking forward to this race. I am. I like to get out with the people. I'm looking forward to telling the people of this country where I stand, what I believe, and where I'll lead this country. (Applause.) I believe every child can learn and that every school must teach. (Applause.) That's why we passed important reforms of our schools in Washington. See, we're challenging the soft bigotry of low expectations. (Applause.) I believe if you lower the bar, you're going to get lousy results. I believe if you believe in the best and worth of every child and raise that bar, you're going to get excellent results. (Applause.)I believe it's important to measure early, so you can solve problems early, before it's too late. We've got to stop this practice of just shuffling kids through school whether they can read, write, add, and subtract or not. (Applause.) I believe in local control of schools. And I know we're making progress closing the achievement gap in America, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)I believe we have a moral responsibility to honor our seniors with good health care. (Applause.) You might remember the old Medicare debate. They called it, ""Mediscare."" (Laughter.) People would talk about it, then they would beat you over the head politically with the issue. But I went to Washington to fix things. I went to Washington to solve problems. Listen, the old Medicare system, which worked well for a lot of seniors, got outdated. After all, it would pay $100,000 for heart surgery, but wouldn't pay for the medicine to prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. (Applause.) So we strengthened and modernized Medicare. Our seniors got choices. And beginning in 2006, there's going to prescription drug coverage for our seniors. (Applause.) And we are not going to turn back.I believe in the energy and innovation of our farmers and workers and small business owners and ranchers. And that's why we unleashed that energy with the largest tax relief in a generation. (Applause.) When you're out there gathering up the vote, I want you to remind your friends and neighbors what we have been through. We've been through a recession, we've been through corporate scandals, we've been through a terrorist attack, all of which affected our economy, but we're overcoming those obstacles. (Applause.)This economy, because of our tax relief and because we've got great people in this country who refuse to be intimidated, who believe in a future, is strong and it's getting stronger. Last Friday, we showed we added 144,000 new jobs in August -- (applause) -- 1.7 million since August of '03. The national unemployment rate has fallen to 5.4 percent. (Applause.) That is lower than the average rate of the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.)I believe a President must confront problems and not pass them on to future generations and future presidents. (Applause.) I believe the most solemn duty of the American President is to protect the American people. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This isn't going to happen on my watch. (Applause.)I'm running for President with a clear and positive plan to build a safer world and a more hopeful America. I'm running with a compassionate conservative philosophy. Government should help people improve their lives, not try to run their lives. (Applause.) And I believe this nation wants steady, consistent, principled leadership, and that is why, with your help, we're going to score a great national victory in November. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: The world we live in is a changing world. You know, when our dads were coming up, a person was likely to have one job at one company and mom was going to stay at home. That's just the way it used to be. It's changed here in America. A lot of women not only work inside the home, they're working outside the home. Our workforce is changing. People are changing careers more often these days.And yet, the most fundamental systems, the tax code and health coverage and pension plans and worker training, were created for the world of yesterday, not tomorrow. I'm running to transform these systems so that all citizens are equipped and prepared -- and thus free -- to be able to realize the great promise of America. (Applause.)Listen, any hopeful society has got to have a growing economy. And that's why I've got a plan to keep this economy moving forward. In a changing world, America must be the best place in the world to do business. (Applause.) That means we've got to stop these junk lawsuits that are hounding our small business owners in America. (Applause.) It means we've got to reduce the regulations on those who employee people.To create jobs here in America, we need an energy plan. Listen, I submitted one to the Congress over two years ago. It's a plan that encourages conservation. It's a plan that encourages the use of renewable sources of energy like ethanol and biodiesel. (Applause.) It's a plan that encourages clean coal technology. It's a plan that encourages environmentally sensitive exploration for natural gas. But it's a plan that says, if we expect to keep jobs in America, we must be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)We're going to keep opening up markets. Listen, this farm economy is strong. You might remember what it was like in 2000. Now, look, I understand the farm economy is never strong enough. (Laughter.) And the weather is never good enough. (Laughter.) The price of beans and corn are pretty high. And one reason it's high is because I made a pledge to our farmers here in Missouri and around the country that I would do my best to open up markets. We want you feeding not only the American citizens, we want you feeding everybody around the world. (Applause.)To create jobs, we've got to be wise about how we spend your money in Washington, and keep your taxes low. (Applause.) Listen, there's a difference in this campaign about taxes. I'm running against a fellow who has promised over $2 trillion of new federal spending. And so they said: Well, how are you going to pay for it? And he said: Well, I'm going to pay for it by just taxing the rich. Let me tell you two things wrong with that: One, you can't tax the rich enough to pay for the $2 trillion in new spending. You can play like you can tax the rich enough to do it, but the numbers don't add up. Secondly, you've heard that business, haven't you, in politics, about tax the rich? That's why they hire accountants and lawyers, and you get stuck with the bill. But we're not going to let him tax you, because we're going to win in November. (Applause.)Another drag on our economy is the federal tax code. The tax code today is a complicated mess. It's more than a million words long and filled with loopholes for special interests. This tax code weighs heavily on our economy. (Applause.) It weighs heavily on every American family. Sitting down to do your taxes shouldn't require wading through more than 1 million words of complicated rules.This current tax code burdens hard-working Americans with more than 6 billion hours of paperwork and headache every year. That's about as much time as all Missouri's workers and small business owners and farmers and ranchers spend at work in an average year. This tax code needs to be changed. (Applause.)The tax code is so complicated even the short tax form requires more than 11 hours to prepare. That doesn't sound very short to me. For the sake of economic growth and for the sake of fairness, I will lead a bipartisan team to simplify and reform the federal tax code. (Applause.)We need to do more to help our workers gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. That's why I'll double the number of people served by our principal job training program, and expand access to our community colleges all across America. (Applause.)Most new jobs are now filled by people with at least two hours of college -- two years of college. Yet one in four of our students gets there. In our high schools, we'll fund early intervention programs to help students at risk. We'll place a new focus on math and science. Over time, we'll require a rigorous exam before graduation. By raising performance at our high schools and expanding Pell grants for low and middle-income families, we'll help more Americans start their career with a college diploma. (Applause.)In a time of change, we've got to make sure that we've got health care that's available and affordable. More than one-half of the uninsured are small business employees and their families. Yet small businesses are having trouble affording health care. To make sure they get the help they need, we will allow small firms to join together to purchase insurance at the discounts available to big companies. (Applause.)We'll expand health savings accounts. We've going to make sure that every poor county in America has got a health center, a health community center or a rural health center, so people can get the primary care they need, so we can help people with their health care.But let me tell you what else we need to do. We need to do something about these frivolous lawsuits that are running up the cost of your health care and running good docs out of business. (Applause.) We've got an issue in America. Too many good docs are getting out of business. Too many OB/GYNs aren't able to practice their love with women all across this country. See, I don't think you can be pro-doctor and pro-patient and pro-hospital and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) I think you've got to make a choice. My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. (Applause.) I made my choice. I'm for medical liability reform now. (Applause.) In all we do to improve health care, we will make sure that health decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)We'll continue to promote ownership in America. In a changing time, ownership can bring stability to your life. There's nothing better than hearing the fact that more and more people are owning their own home. The home ownership rate in America is at an all-time high. We'll continue to expand home ownership across this country. There's nothing better than somebody opening up their door saying, welcome to my home. (Applause.) Welcome to my piece of property. (Applause.)As well, our retirement systems must reflect the changing time. If you're an older citizen, or a near-older citizen like me, a baby boomer, nothing is going to change with your Social Security. It's a solemn pledge this government has made, it's a pledge that will be kept. But we better worry about our children and grandchildren when it comes to Social Security. (Applause.) I believe younger workers ought to be allowed to put some of their taxes aside in a personal savings account to enhance their Social Security benefit. (Applause.)There's a difference of philosophy in this campaign. If you listen carefully to the rhetoric of my opponent, he's going to expand government. Ours is a campaign that is going to expand opportunity. (Applause.) I believe government ought to trust the people of the United States of America. (Applause.) In a changing world, there are some things that won't change, the values we try to live by: courage, compassion, reverence, and integrity. In a changing world, we will stand by the institutions that give us stability: our families, our schools, and our religious congregations. (Applause.)We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every person counts. (Applause.) We stand for marriage and family, which are the foundations of society. (Applause.) We stand for religious charities and community-based organizations that provide a safety net of mercy and compassion. (Applause.) Our government must never discriminate against faith-based programs. (Applause.) And I stand for the appointment of federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. (Applause.)This election will also determine how America responds to the continuing danger of terrorism. Since the terrible morning of September the 11th, 2001, we have fought the terrorists across the Earth, not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake. (Applause.) Our strategy is clear: we'll defend our homeland, we'll transform our military, we'll reform and strengthen our intelligence services, we will stay on the offensive. (Applause.) We will strike the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.) We will advance liberty in the broader Middle East and around the world by staying true to our beliefs and being resolved and firm. We will prevail. (Applause.)Our strategy is succeeding. I want you to listen to this. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda, Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups, Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fund-raising, Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons, Iraq was a gathering threat, and al Qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned its attacks.Because we acted, the government of Afghanistan is fighting terror, Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders, Saudi is making raids and arrests, Libya is dismantling its weapons programs, the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al Qaeda's key members and associates have been brought to justice. (Applause.)We have led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.) Progress involved careful diplomacy and clear moral purpose, and some tough decisions. And the toughest came on Iraq. We knew Saddam Hussein's record of aggression and support for terror. Remember, he housed Abu Nidal and his crowd. He's the guy that killed Leon Klinghoffer. Zarqawi and his bunch -- he's the guy that beheads people -- he paid the families of suiciders. He subsidized them. We knew his long history of pursuing and even using weapons of mass destruction. We know that after September the 11th, our country must think differently. It's a lesson we must not forget. We must take threats seriously before they fully materialize. (Applause.)In Saddam Hussein, we saw a threat. So I went to the United States Congress. They looked at the intelligence I looked at. They remembered the history I remembered. And they voted overwhelmingly to use -- to authorize the use of force. My opponent looked at the same intelligence I looked at. He voted for the authorization of force.Before the Commander-in-Chief commits troops into combat, we must try all means to solve a problem. That's why I went to the United Nations. I was hoping that diplomacy would work. The United Nations looked at the same intelligence I looked at. They remembered the same history of Saddam Hussein that we remembered. And they voted 15 to nothing. And the U.N. Security Council said to Saddam Hussein, disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences.The world spoke again. But as he had for over a decade, Saddam Hussein refused the demands of the free world. He wasn't interested. As a matter of fact, when they sent inspectors into his country, he systematically deceived them. So I had a choice to make at this point in our history: do I trust the word of a madman --AUDIENCE: Nooo!THE PRESIDENT: -- do I forget the lessons of September the 11th, or take action to defend this country? Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Because we acted in our own self-interest, because we acted to defend ourselves, 50 million people now live in freedom. (Applause.) In Afghanistan, a country which has been brutalized by the Taliban, a country in which many young girls didn't get to go to school, a country in which their moms were whipped in the public squares because they didn't tow the line to these barbarians running the country, has now registered 10 million people to vote in the upcoming election. (Applause.)Freedom is powerful. Freedom is powerful. Despite ongoing acts of violence, Iraq now has a very strong Prime Minister, a national council, and national elections will be held in Iraq in January. (Applause.)We're going to stand with the people in those countries because when America gives its word, America must keep its word. (Applause.) And we're serving a vital cause. See, free societies in the Middle East will be hopeful societies which no longer feed resentment and breed violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight terrorists instead of harboring them. And that keeps us safer and it makes the world more peaceful.Our mission in Afghanistan and Iraq is clear. We will help new leaders to train their armies so Afghan citizens and Iraqi citizens can defend their country against the few who want us -- who want to thwart the hopes of the many. We'll help them move toward elections, we'll get them to the path of stability and democracy as quickly as possible, and then our troops will return home with the honor they have earned. (Applause.)I've had the privilege of meeting many who serve. I've seen their unselfish courage and their great decency. Ladies and gentlemen, the cause of freedom is in really good hands. (Applause.) And I want to thank the veterans who are here for having set such a great example to those who wear the uniform. (Applause.)I've made a commitment to our troops and to their loved ones. They will have all the resources, all the tools and support they need for them to do their missions. That's why a year ago, September, I went to Congress and proposed $87 billion in funding for body armor, and spare parts, ammunition, fuel, other supplies needed for our troops in combat in Afghanistan and in Iraq. And that really important funding request received bipartisan support. It was so overwhelming that only 12 United States senators voted against the funding request. Two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Only four United States senators voted to authorize the use of force, and then voted against funding our troops -- only four -- and two of those senators were my opponent and his running mate. When asked to explain his decision, he said, I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I suspect here -- I suspect here in Poplar Bluff, not many people talk that way. (Applause.) They then pressed him, and he said he's proud of his vote. And finally, he said it was a complicated matter. There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)After voting for the war, but against funding it, after saying he would have voted for the war even knowing everything we know today, my opponent woke up this morning with new campaign advisors, and yet another new position. (Laughter.) Suddenly, he's against it again. (Laughter.)AUDIENCE: Flip-flop! Flip-Flop! Flip-flop!THE PRESIDENT: No matter how many times Senator Kerry changes his mind, it was right for America then, and it's right for America now that Saddam Hussein is no longer in power. (Applause.)Over the next four years, I'll continue to work with our allies and friends to promote freedom and peace. There's about 40 nations involved in Afghanistan, some 30 in Iraq. And I appreciate their service and sacrifice, and so do our troops. Over the four years, we'll build these alliances and make them stronger, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)I believe in the transformational power of liberty. The wisest use of American strength is to advance freedom. I believe America is called to lead the cause of freedom. I believe that millions in the Middle East plead in silence for their liberty. I believe that given the chance, they will embrace the most honorable form of government every devised by man. I believe all these things because I understand freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)This young century will be liberty's century. By promoting freedom at home and abroad, we'll build a safer world and a more hopeful America. We'll reform our systems to help our people, to help people realize their dreams. We'll spread ownership and opportunity to every corner of this country. We'll pass the enduring values of our country on to another generation. We will continue to lead the cause of freedom and peace -- (applause) -- the peace we all want.For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. You know, there are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. This is a time that needs -- when we need firm resolve and clear vision and a deep faith in the values that make us a great nation. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers on September the 14th, 2001. It's a day I will never forget. There were workers in hard hats there, yelling at me at the top of their lungs, ""Whatever it takes."" (Applause.) I remember trying to do my best to comfort people, and a guy looked me right in the eye, and he said, ""Do not let me down."" He took that day personally, everybody there took it personally, you took it personally, and so did I. (Applause.) I have a duty that goes on. I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)Four years ago I traveled your great state, asking for the vote. I said, if you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. And with your help, with your hard work, I will do so for the next four years. (Applause.) God bless. Thank you for coming. (Applause.) Thank you all. (Applause.) Thanks so much. (Applause.) "
bush,2008," Thanks for coming. Thank you for bringing your families. Thanks for taking time out of your Saturday morning to provide such a warm welcome to somebody who is coming here to ask for your help and ask for your vote. (Applause.) I'm proud to be in Miami County, Ohio today kick off a bus tour across your important state. I'm here to say to you, I'm ready to lead this nation for four more  years, and I want your help. (Applause.)Boehner said if you came to this part of the world, some people might show up to say hello. (Applause.) He was right, and I'm grateful. Thanks for being here. I'm proud to call John Boehner my friend. I know you're proud to call him Congressman. He's doing a great job on the people of this part of the world, and I appreciate serving with him.I wish Laura were here to see the size of this crowd. (Applause.) She's not going to believe when I tell her how many people came. (Applause.) She's going to say it was just a Texas tall tale. Laura is a great mother, a wonderful wife, a terrific First Lady. (Applause.) I'm going to give you some reasons why I hope you put me back into office today, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura will be the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)I'm proud of my running mate, Dick Cheney. (Applause.) Listen, I didn't pick him because of his wavy hair. (Laughter.) I picked him because of his sound judgment, his vast experience. I picked him because he can get the job done. (Applause.)I want to thank Governor Bob for joining us today. Mr. Governor, thank you for joining me on this bus trip. We're traveling across this great state of yours, shaking as many hands as possible, looking people in the eye, and saying, I've got a clear vision of where I want to take this country. (Applause.)I want to thank Senator Mike DeWine for being on this bus trip with me today. (Applause.) I appreciate working with Mike and the other Senator, George Voinovich. Put George back in there for six years. You need him in the state of Ohio. (Applause.) Mike wisely brought his wife, Fran, and daughter, Anna. I'm proud to be traveling with them, as well. I want to thank Secretary of State Ken Blackwell for joining us today. (Applause.)Mr. Mayor is with us. Mr. Mayor, His Honor, Mike Beamish, is with us. Mr. Mayor, thank you for your hospitality. (Applause.) I appreciate you letting us use this fantastic town square. Such a beautiful sight, made more beautiful by the fact that a lot of your citizens have come here today. (Applause.) My only advice, Mr. Mayor, is make sure you fill the potholes. (Laughter.)I appreciate Don McLaurin, the Mayor of Trotwood, Ohio, for being here. I want to thank all the local officials. I want to thank the Troy High Marching Band for being here today. (Applause.)Today, when we landed in Dayton, I met Becky Brown. (Applause.) She brought some of her cousins with her. (Laughter.) Becky is the one millionth person to sign up as a volunteer in the Bush-Cheney '04 effort. (Applause.) That means, she's willing to put up signs and willing to get on the phone and willing to work and turn out the vote.See, we have a duty in our country to vote. We have an obligation to participate in the political process. So I'm here to thank all of you all who are involved in the grassroots efforts here in Ohio. I want to thank you for going to your community centers and your places of worship and where you work, and saying to your friends and neighbors, register to vote. It's important you do so. And then after you get them registered, remind them to vote. And as they start heading to the polls, tell them if they want an administration that's going to make this country safer, stronger and better, put Dick Cheney and me back in office. (Applause.)Listen, we have done a lot in this country. We've accomplished a great deal.AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We have been through -- we've been through a lot together. And we've accomplished a lot. But there's only one reason to look backward, and that is to determine who best to lead us forward. I'm here to tell you that all -- we've done a lot, we have more to do. We have more to do to make this country a more secure country. We have more to do to spread the peace. We have more to do to make America a hopeful place for every single citizen.And that starts with making sure our public schools are the centers of excellence we know they can be. John Boehner mentioned the No Child Left Behind Act. I want to take you back three-and-a-half years ago to a system that simply moved children through year after year, grade after grade, without teaching the basics. So we challenged the soft bigotry of low expectations. We raised the bar, because we know every child can learn to read and write, and add and subtract. We expect every child to learn to read and write and add and subtract. We increased federal funding, but we increased local control of schools and accountability across America so not one child is left behind in this country. (Applause.)We're making progress. We're closing the achievement gap in America, but there's more to do. We want to make sure math and sciences are emphasized in our high schools, so our youngsters can be able to participate in the jobs of the 21st century. We're going to expand the Internet in the classrooms. We're going to make sure there's early intervention programs available so kids don't slip behind. We're going to make sure that a high school diploma means something over the next four years. What I'm telling you is, four more years of this administration will help a rising generation earn the skills and confidence necessary to compete in a global world. (Applause.)We have more to do to make health care available and affordable. When we came to office, you might remember all those political campaigns, give us a chance, we'll fix Medicare for our seniors, we'll make sure the system is strengthened and modern. But nothing ever got done. We got the job done for the seniors of America. The Medicare system gives seniors more choices. And starting in 2006, there will be prescription drugs available for those on Medicare.We're making progress when it comes to health care. We've expanded the number of community centers that are available for low-income Americans. We provided health savings accounts to encourage families to save, tax-free, for their own needs. When it comes to making health care more affordable and available, there is more work to be done over the next four years. Most people get their health care through their businesses. Most new jobs are created by small businesses. Many small businesses are having trouble affording health care. Therefore, in order to help American families, it makes sense to let small businesses pool together and purchase insurance at the same discount that big businesses are able to do. (Applause.)We will harness technology to reduce costs and reduce error. We will continue to expand research to seek new cures for diseases. And I'll tell you what else you need to do, not only in Ohio, but around the nation; we must stop these frivolous lawsuits that are running up the cost of health care and driving docs out of business. (Applause.) You cannot be pro-doctor and pro-patient and pro-hospital and pro-plaintiff attorney at the same time. (Applause.) You have to make your choice. My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. I made my choice. I'm standing with the docs and patients. I am for medical liability reform now. (Applause.) In all we do to improve health care in America, we will make sure the health decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by Washington, D.C. bureaucrats. (Applause.)We've got to make -- we've got to do more to make this economy stronger. Listen, I understand there's places here in Ohio that are lagging behind the national recovery. We will continue to work to create an environment for jobs to grow so people can find work. But I want to remind you, we've been through a lot in this country. We've been through a recession and corporate scandals, and an attack on our country. Yet, we're overcoming these obstacles. We're overcoming these obstacles because the entrepreneurial spirit is strong in America. We're overcoming these obstacles because America's farmers and ranchers know what they're doing. We're coming over -- we're overcoming these obstacles because we've got the greatest workers in the world in this country. (Applause.) And I think we're overcoming these obstacles because of well-timed tax cuts. (Applause.)You might remember that tax relief. We said, if we're going to provide tax relief, everybody who pays taxes gets relief. We're not going to play politics with your wallet. We raised the child credit to help moms and dads with raising their children. We reduced the marriage penalty. I believe the tax code ought to encourage marriage, not penalize marriage. (Applause.) We're helping our small businesses, and it's working. Our economy has been growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. We've added 1.5 million new jobs over the past 12 months. The national unemployment rate is 5.5 percent, which is lower than the national average of the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. (Applause.)We're headed in the right direction, but there's more work to be done. In order to keep jobs here in America, this nation needs an energy policy. We need to encourage conservation. We need to encourage alternative uses of energy. But we need to be using Ohio coal and Ohio natural gas to make us less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)In order to make sure jobs stay here in Ohio and America, we're going to make sure countries treat us the way we treat them when it comes to trade. Our markets are open; they need to open up their markets -- because American workers can compete with anybody, anyplace, anytime in this world. (Applause.)We need to get rid of these junk lawsuits that are threatening small businesses all across America. (Applause.) We need to make sure our regulatory system is reasonable and fair. In order to keep jobs here in America, we've got to make sure American workers gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century, which means we will continue to use our community college systems as a place for people to receive a lifetime of learning in America. (Applause.)And finally, to make sure this economy grows and jobs stay here in America, we've got to be wise about how we spend your money. And we've got to keep your taxes low. (Applause.) Yes, we have a difference of opinion in this race. I'm running against a fellow who has already promised over $2 trillion of new spending.AUDIENCE: Boooo!THE PRESIDENT: And there's still September and October to go. (Laughter.) He's got plenty of time to go out there and make more promises. They said, how are you going to pay for it? He said, oh, I'm going to tax the rich. You've heard that before, haven't you? Every time they say, tax the rich, the rich dodge and you pay. But we're not going to let him; we're going to beat him in November of this year. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: I'm running -- I'm running because I know we have more to do to wage and win the war against the terrorists. America's future -- America's future depends on our willingness to lead in this world. If America shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This is not going to happen on my watch. (Applause.)The world changed on a terrible September morning, and since that day we have changed the world. Before September the 11th, Afghanistan served as the home base of al Qaeda, which trained and deployed thousands of killers to set up cells around the world, including the United States. Because we acted, Afghanistan is a rising democracy. You realize, over 10 million people have registered to vote in the presidential elections coming this fall in Afghanistan. (Applause.) Because we acted, many young girls go to school for the first time in that country. (Applause.) Because we acted, Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. Because we acted, America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Today, because America and our allies have sent a strong and easy-to-understand message, the leader of Libya has abandoned his pursuit of weapons of mass destruction, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, the ruler of Iraq was a sworn enemy of America. He was defying the world. He was firing missiles at American pilots enforcing the world's sanctions. He had used weapons of mass destruction. He harbored terrorists. He invaded his neighbors. He subsidized the families of suicide bombers. He murdered tens of thousands of his own citizens. He was a source of great instability in the world's most volatile region.I saw a threat. One of the important lessons of September the 11th that this nation must never forget is that we must take threats seriously before they fully materialize. (Applause.) I went to the United States Congress. I said, I see a threat. They looked at the same intelligence I had looked at. They looked at the same history of Saddam Hussein and came to the same conclusion, as they authorized the use of force. Republicans and Democrats alike saw a threat, including my opponent.I then went to the United Nations. Before a President is to commit force, we must try all means necessary to solve a threat peacefully. So I went to the United Nations. I said, we see a threat. They looked at the same intelligence and, as they had for over a decade, they concluded that Saddam Hussein was a threat. The U.N. Security Council voted 15 to nothing to say to Saddam Hussein, disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences. As he had for over a decade, he refused to comply with the demands of the free world. As a matter of fact, he systematically deceived the inspectors that were sent into his country.So I had a choice to make: Do I forget the lessons of September the 11th and take the word of a madman, or defend this country? Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Even though -- even though we did not find the stockpiles we expected to find, Saddam Hussein had the capability of making weapons of mass destruction, and he could have passed that capability on to the enemy. That was a risk we could not afford to take after September the 11th. Knowing what I know today, I would have made the same decision. (Applause.) America and the world are safer with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. (Applause.)Now, almost two years after he voted for the war in Iraq, and seven months after switching positions to declare himself the anti-war candidate, my opponent has found a new nuance. He now agrees it was the right decision to go into Iraq. See, after months of questioning my motives, and even my credibility, he now agrees with me that even though we did not find the stockpiles we thought we would find, knowing everything we know today, he would have voted to go into Iraq and remove Saddam Hussein from power. I want to thank him for clearing that up. (Applause.) However, I warn you that there's still a little more than 60 days left in the campaign for him to change his mind again. (Laughter.)We have more to do. I'm running because I understand that we must continue to work with our friends and allies to aggressively pursue the terrorists in Iraq and Afghanistan and elsewhere. You cannot talk sense to these people, see. You cannot negotiate with them. We can't be blind to the realities of the world and hope for the best. We must aggressively pursue them around the world so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)We will continue to lead this world with confidence and moral clarity. We put together a vast coalition of like-minded nations, who are working to secure our people and to spread the peace. We've got nearly 40 nations involved in Afghanistan, some 30 involved in Iraq, over 60 involved in a Proliferation Security Initiative to interdict technology and supplies to potentially build weapons of mass destruction. We will continue to work and build our alliances over the next four years. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)We will keep our commitments to Afghanistan and Iraq so that they become peaceful, democratic societies. It's in our interests that they become peaceful and democratic societies. These countries are now governed by two strong leaders, leaders who have set their countries on the path to elections.We have a clear goal in Afghanistan and Iraq. We want a peaceful and democratic country to emerge that are allies in the war on terror. Our military forces will help meet that goal by not only providing security for a political process to develop, but by helping to train Afghans and Iraqis so they get to defeat those who want to stop the march of freedom in their own countries. We will complete this mission as quickly as possible, so our troops do not stay a day longer than necessary. (Applause.)And I'm proud of our military. They're doing the hard work of freedom and peace. (Applause.) I want to thank all the veterans who are here today for setting such a fine example for those who wear the uniform. (Applause.)I have made a commitment to those who wear our uniform and to their loved ones that they will have the resources they need to fight and win the war against the terrorists. (Applause.) We are meeting that commitment in Washington, D.C. Last September, while our troops were in combat in Afghanistan and Iraq, I proposed supplemental funding to support them in their missions. This legislation provided money for body armor, vital equipment, hazard pay, health benefits, ammunition and fuel and spare parts. It was necessary. It was an important piece of legislation. We received great bipartisan support. So strong was the bipartisan support that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against this vital funding -- two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Boooo!THE PRESIDENT: So I said, why did you make that vote? He said, I actually voted for the $87 billion right before I voted against it. I suspect you don't find a lot of people right here in Troy, Ohio who talk like that. They then pressed him, and they said, don't you have another explanation? He said, well, he's proud of the vote, and then he finally said, it's just a complicated matter. There is nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)In our long run -- in the long-run, our security is not guaranteed by force alone. We must work to change the conditions that give rise to terror: poverty and hopelessness and resentment. A free and peaceful Iraq and a free and peaceful Afghanistan will serve as powerful examples in a neighborhood that is desperate for freedom. Free countries do not export terror. Free countries listen to the hopes and aspirations of their people. Free countries make the world a more peaceful place. By serving the cause of liberty, we're bringing hope to others, and that makes America more secure. By serving the cause of liberty, we're making the world a more peaceful place. By serving the cause of liberty, we're serving the deepest ideals of our own country. Freedom is not America's gift to the world. Freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)We've got more work to do to protect this homeland. I see firefighters and police officers who are here with us today. I want to thank the first responders for their hard work. (Applause.) You need to know that cooperation at the federal level and state level and local level has vastly improved since September the 11th, and it needs to be. There's an enemy that lurks and still hates us. We have more work to do. Yesterday I announced further reforms of intelligence-gathering systems to make sure that we get the best information so we can respond to threat to our country. It is essential that Congress renew the Patriot Act. The Patriot Act gives our law enforcement vital tools to break and find terrorist cells before they can affect America. No, we're working hard to secure our ports and secure our borders. There's a lot of good people working on your behalf to make this homeland more secure.But I will warn you, reform is not easy in Washington. There's a lot of entrenched interests there. There's a lot of people who have spent a lifetime in Washington and they want to defend the status quo. It's not enough to advocate reform; you have to be able to get the job done. And so when you're out campaigning on my behalf, when you're out there registering people to vote, and then encouraging them to vote, remind them that when it comes to reforming schools so we can increase excellence in every classroom in America, we're getting the job done. When it comes to health care for our seniors and for American families, we're getting the job done. When it comes to expanding our economy, defeating the recession, we're getting the job done. When it comes to defending this homeland and spreading freedom and peace, we're getting the job done. When it comes to electing a President, reelect somebody who can get the job done. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We're living in a time of change. It's a time of change, and change can be unsettling. Government must recognize that and government must stand side by side with workers and families during this time of change. See, we have a difference of philosophy in this race. I believe government ought to help, not give orders. I believe ought to -- I believe ought to -- government ought to encourage people to realize their dreams, not dictate to people how to achieve their dreams. And there's a difference in philosophy that I intend to make and clarify across this country. And one of the ways that government can help people during times of change is to encourage an ownership society, is to encourage people to own their own business. There's nothing better than an America for people to know that the entrepreneurial spirit is strong and alive and well.In order to provide security during a time of change, we ought to encourage health care accounts that people own and call their own, that they can take from job to job. I see we've got a lot of younger workers here, and I want to thank you for coming. But you need to make sure you listen carefully to the debate on Social Security. Baby boomers like me are just fine when it comes to the fiscal sanity of Social Security. People just starting in the work place better understand that we must think differently about how to strengthen Social Security. I believe the best way to do so is to make sure younger workers have the option of taking some of their own money and putting them in personal savings accounts that they can call their own. (Applause.)In a changing world, when the workplace has changed, we've got to make sure our work rules are family-friendly. That includes flex-time and comp-time to allow moms and dads to spend more quality time with their children.In a changing world, there's nothing like owning your own home to provide hope and stability. Home ownership rates are at an all-time high in America. (Applause.) We will continue to promote policy that encourages that moment when somebody opens the door of their dwelling and says, ""Welcome to my house."" That's what we love to hear. We love to hear that phrase, ""Welcome to my piece of property."" When you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of the United States of America. (Applause.)In a time of change, there are some things that won't change, the values we try to live by -- courage and compassion, reverence and integrity; our belief in liberty and opportunity and the non-negotiable demands of human dignity. (Applause.) In a time of change, we will support the institutions that give us direction and purpose -- our families, our schools, our religious congregations. (Applause.)We believe -- we stand for institutions like marriage and family, which are the foundations of society. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every person counts. (Applause.) We stand for judges who faithfully interpret the law, instead of legislating from the bench. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of responsibility in America. Listen, the culture is beginning to change from one that has said, if it feels good, just go ahead and do it, if you've got a problem, blame somebody else -- to a culture in which each of us understands we're responsible for the decisions we make in life.If you are fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.) If you're worried about the quality of the education in Troy, Ohio, you're responsible for doing something about it. (Applause.) If you're a CEO in corporate America, you are responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.) And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor, just like we'd like to be loved ourselves.The true strength of this country is the hearts and souls of the American citizens. I'll continue to rally the armies of compassion over the next four years, call upon those loving souls who have heard the call to love a neighbor so that we can change America one heart, one conscience, and one soul at a time. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. You know, there are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. This is a time where we need firm resolve, clear vision, and a deep belief in the values that make America a great place. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that era when -- that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It is a day that I will never forget. There were workers in hard-hats yelling at me, ""Whatever it takes."" I remember walking the line, thanking the firefighters and rescuers who were there, and a guy with bloodshot eyes grabbed me by the arm, stared square in my eyes, and said, ""Do not let me down."" Moments I will never forget. I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect America. I will never relent in defending this country, whatever it takes. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: We have come through much together. We have been through a lot together. We have done a lot of hard work. We're moving this country forward by extending freedom around the world and opportunity here at home. During the next four years, I'll continue to work to spread opportunity and ownership to every corner of the country. I want every citizen to realize the great promise of our blessed land. We will continue to work to pass the enduring values of our country on to another generation. We will lead the cause of freedom and peace. And we will prevail. (Applause.)When I traveled your state four years ago, I made a pledge to our citizens that if you honored me with this great responsibility, I would uphold the dignity and the honor of the office to which I had been elected. With your hard work, with your help, I will do so for the next four years.May God bless. Thank you for coming. Thank you all, very much. (Applause.) "
bush,2008," Thank you all. (Applause.) Thanks for  coming. (Applause.) Thank you all. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Thank you all for coming. Gosh, I appreciate so many coming out to say hello to Rudy. (Laughter.) We were in Las Cruces, and Farmington, and here we end up in the great city of Albuquerque. (Applause.) It's been a fantastic day in the Land of Enchantment. (Applause.)I want to thank you all for coming out. I told Rudy, you're going to like it here. I said, you're going to see more cowboy hats than you see ties. (Applause.) No, we're right here in the heart and soul of America -- Albuquerque, New Mexico. (Applause.)I'm proud to be traveling with this good man. He's a great leader, a great friend, and a wonderful American. He showed the world great courage during traumatic times, and I'm proud to be standing by him. I'm proud he's out working for me. (Applause.) And I'm proud you all are here, too. I'm here asking for your vote, and I'm here asking for your help. (Applause.) I have no doubt in my mind with your help, we'll carry New Mexico and win a great victory in November. (Applause.)I am sorry that Laura is not here. I kissed her good-bye in Crawford this morning. I said, I'm heading west. (Applause.) I said I got to go work. I'm anxious for people to hear my story. I want people to know I've got more to do to lead this nation for four more years. (Applause.) I'm really proud of Laura. I'm proud of her. She's a great mom and a wonderful wife. And she's a wonderful First Lady, as well. Today, I'm going to give you -- (applause) -- today, I'm going to give you some reasons why I think you ought put me back in there, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura will be First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)I'm proud of my running mate, Dick Cheney. He might be short on hair, but he's long on experience. He can get the job done. (Applause.)I appreciate -- listen, I enjoy working with Pete Domenici. What a good man Pete is. He's a -- (Applause.) I'm proud to work with him. I know you're proud to call him Senator. I'm also really pleased to be here with Congresswoman Heather Wilson. (Applause.) She is as good as they come in the United States Congress.I want to thank all of my friends who are the grass roots activists -- John Sanchez and Manny Lujan. I want to thank them for their work. I appreciate the fact that Brooks and Dunn are here. What a great -- (Applause.) What great Americans they are, and not only that, they can sing. (Applause.) Really proud to have them here. I want to thank Tony Lynn for announcing the program. (Applause.)Most of all, I want to thank you for being here. I just want you to know I believe all of us in America have a duty to vote. (Applause.) And I would like for you to encourage your neighbors to register to vote. (Applause.) We have an obligation to do that, to vote in our society, and one way you can help in this campaign is to become a part of this massive registration campaign that we've got going. And vote -- register Republicans and independents and discerning Democrats. (Applause.) Remind them we've got more work to do. Remind them that with four more years, America will be a safer, stronger and better country. (Applause.)We've been through a lot together, and we've accomplished a great deal, but the only reason to look backward is to best determine who to lead us forward, and that's what I'm here to talk about. We've done a lot but there is more to do to move America forward. We've got more to do to create jobs, more to do to improve our schools. We've got more to do to fight terror. We have got more to do to spread liberty and peace. (Applause.)We've made much progress. I'm here to tell you I'm ready to lead the country for four more years to do more for the people. (Applause.)We have more to do to make our public schools the centers of excellence we know they all can be so that no child is left behind in America. (Applause.) We came to office three-and-a-half years ago, too many children were being shuffled from grade to grade, year after year, without learning the basics. So we decided to try something different. We said we'll send more money back to the states, but in return, we expect results. We're challenging the soft bigotry of low expectations. We're raising the bar. We're empowering parents. We believe in local control of schools, and we're making progress. (Applause.)There is more work to be done. We've got to make sure we've got more science and math courses for our high school kids. We've got to bring the Internet in to bring the latest to our classrooms. We must have intervention programs to make sure children do not slip behind. We want to make sure a high school diploma means something. After four more years, a rising generation will have the skills and the confidence necessary to realize the American dream. (Applause.)We have more to do to make quality health care available and affordable. You might remember the old Medicare debates of the past. Politician after politician, give us a chance to strengthen Medicare, and nothing got done. We got the job done. (Applause.) We now have a Medicare system -- (applause) -- Medicare system that will allow seniors to make their own choices, to meet their own needs, and starting in 2006, a Medicare system that will provide prescription drugs for our seniors. (Applause.)We've done more. We've expanded community health centers for low-income Americans. We want people getting primary care in these centers, not in emergency rooms. We've created health savings accounts so families can save tax-free for their own health care needs. There is more work to be done. Most people get their health care through jobs, their jobs, and most new jobs are created by small businesses. (Applause.) But many small businesses are having trouble affording health care. In order to allow small businesses to afford health care so American families get the help they need, we must allow small employers to join together to be able to purchase health care at the discounts that big companies get. (Applause.)We will harness technology to reduce costs and reduce errors. We will continue to expand research and find new cures. And in order to make sure health care is available, affordable, in Albuquerque, New Mexico, we must do something about the frivolous lawsuits that are running up the cost of your medicine. (Applause.)See, I don't think you can be pro-doctor and pro-patient and pro-plaintiff attorney at the same time. I think you have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. (Laughter.) I made my choice. I have made my choice. I'm standing with the patients and the doctors, the nurses and the hospitals. I am for medical liability reform -- now. (Applause.)We've got more to do to make sure this economy is strong. Remember what we've been through in a short period of time. We've been through a recession, we've been through corporate scandals, we've been through the terror attacks. But we've overcome those obstacles. (Applause.) We've overcome the obstacles because the American worker is great. We've overcome the obstacles because the entrepreneurial spirit is strong in America. We've overcome the obstacles because small business owners are dreaming about expanding and creating new jobs. We've overcome the obstacles because our farmers and ranchers know what they're doing. (Applause.) We have overcome those obstacles because of two well-timed tax cuts. (Applause.) We didn't try to pick winners or losers when it came to cutting taxes. We said if you pay taxes, you ought to get relief. (Applause.) We also helped our families. Remember, we raised the child credit. (Applause.) We reduced the marriage penalty. (Applause.) The tax code ought to encourage marriage, not penalize marriage. (Applause.)We helped our small businesses. Because we acted, our economy since last summer has grown at a rate as fast as nearly -- as any rate in nearly 20 years. (Applause.) Over the last 12 months, we've added nearly 1.5 million new jobs. The unemployment rate across our country is 5.5 percent. That is well below the national average of the '70s, the '80s and the '90s. (Applause.) The unemployment rate in the great state of New Mexico is 5.3 percent. (Applause.)We are moving forward. We're not going to go backward. There is more work to be done. In order to keep jobs here in America, we must make sure our regulations are reasonable and fair. In order to keep jobs here in America, we need an energy policy that makes us less dependent on foreign sources of energy. In order to keep jobs here, we've got to do something about these junk lawsuits that are threatening the small business job creators of America.In order to make sure jobs stay here, we want other countries to treat us the way we treat them. (Applause.) Listen, we can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere, so long as the playing field is level. (Applause.) In order to make sure jobs are here, we've got to have an education system that provides a lifetime of learning for America's workers. Listen, the job base is changing. And some of these new jobs that pay more require new skills. That's why I strongly support helping people go back to the community colleges all across America to gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. (Applause.)In order to make sure jobs stay here and this economy continues to grow, we've got to be wise about how we spend your money. (Applause.) In order to keep jobs here and to keep the economy growing, we need to keep your taxes low. (Applause.) I think taxes are an issue in this campaign. My opponent has already promised over $2 trillion of new spending.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: And we've still got the stretch run. (Laughter.) We still got September and October to go. And so they said, how are you going to pay for it. And he used that old, tired class warfare line, we're just going to tax the rich.But you know how that works, don't you?AUDIENCE: Yes!THE PRESIDENT: You've heard them say tax the rich. First of all, you can't tax the rich enough to pay for all the promises. And secondly, the rich are pretty good about hiring accountants and lawyers. Generally, when you hear that, be careful because he's aiming his tax increase at you. But we're not going to let him have it. We're going to win in November. (Applause.)We're doing some smart things. I passed an important law to protect the residents of this state and the forests from catastrophic wild fire.AUDIENCE: Yes!THE PRESIDENT: Our Healthy Forest Restoration Act is good law for New Mexico. It's important law to help us preserve these national treasures. The Cibolo National Forest will benefit from this important legislation. We had a difference of opinion on this subject. My opponent said that the Healthy Forest Act was -- really means we're taking a chain saw to public forests. Then when he came out here to campaign, he turned his position around, he says he likes part of the law. (Laughter.) I guess it's not only the wild fires that shift in the wind. (Laughter.)I'm running again because I understand we have more to do to wage and win the war against terrorism. (Applause.) Our future, America's future depends on our willingness to lead in this world. (Applause.) If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)The world changed on a terrible September morning, and since that day, we changed the world. Before September the 11th, Afghanistan served at the home base of al Qaeda, which trained and deployed thousands of killers to set up cells around the world, including America. Today, because we acted, Afghanistan is a rising democracy. (Applause.) Over ten million people in that country have registered to vote in the upcoming election. (Applause.) Because we acted, Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. Because we acted, many young girls go to school for the first time in Afghanistan. (Applause.) Because we acted, America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Today, because America and our allies have sent a strong and clear message, a message that's easy to understand, the leader of Libya abandoned his pursuit of weapons of mass destruction, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, the ruler of Iraq was a sworn enemy of America. He was defying the world and firing weapons at American pilots who were enforcing the world's sanctions. He had used weapons of mass destruction. He harbored terrorists, he invaded his neighbors, he subsidized the families of suiciders. He had murdered tens of thousands of his own people. He was a source of great instability in a volatile part of the world. He was a threat. (Applause.) One of the lessons of September the 11th that we must never forget is that we must deal with threats before they fully materialize. (Applause.)I went to the United States Congress. I said, this administration sees a threat. They looked at the intelligence I looked at, they remembered the history of Saddam Hussein, and they came to the same conclusion I did, including my opponent, who came to the same conclusion I did. (Applause.) Because I believe we ought to try diplomacy before we ever commit troops, I went to the United Nations. I said to the world, we see a threat. They looked at the same intelligence and concluded, with a 15-0 vote in the Security Council that Saddam Hussein must disclose, disarm or face serious consequences. (Applause.) And as he had for over a decade, Saddam Hussein refused to comply with the demands of the free world. As a matter of fact, we sent in inspectors, he systematically deceived the inspectors. So I had a choice to make: either trust the word of a madman and forget the lessons of September the 11th, or take action to defend our country. Given that choice, I will defend America. (Applause.)Even though we didn't find the stockpiles we expected to find, Saddam had the capability to make weapons of mass destruction and he could have passed that capability on to the terrorist enemy. That's a risk we could not have afforded to take after September the 11th. (Applause.) Knowing what we know today, I would have taken the same action in Iraq. (Applause.)America and the world are safer with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. (Applause.) Now, almost two years after he voted for the war in Iraq, and about seven months after switching positions to declare himself the anti-war candidate, my opponent has found another nuance. (Laughter.) See, he now agrees it was the right decision to go into Iraq. After months of questioning my motives and even my credibility, he now agrees with me that even though we have not found the stockpiles we all thought he had, knowing everything we know today, he would have voted to go into Iraq and remove Saddam from power. And I want to thank him for clearing that up. (Applause.) There's still a little over 60 days in this campaign for him to change his mind again. (Laughter.)I'm running because I understand we have more to do. We will continue to work with our friends and allies around the world to aggressively pursue the terrorists in Iraq and Afghanistan and elsewhere. See, you cannot talk sense into these people. You cannot try to negotiate with them.AUDIENCE: No!THE PRESIDENT: You cannot hope for the best.AUDIENCE: No!THE PRESIDENT: We must engage these enemies overseas so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)America will continue to lead the world with confidence and moral clarity. See, we put together a strong coalition to help us. There's nearly 40 nations involved in Afghanistan, some 30 nations involved in Iraq. Over the next four years, we'll continue to build on our alliances and work with our friends. But I'll never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)We'll keep our commitments to help the people of Afghanistan and Iraq. We'll do so because when America says something, it better mean what it says in order to make the world a more peaceful place. (Applause.) We'll do so because it's in our interest they become democracies and peaceful societies. These nations are now governed by two strong leaders who believe in the hopes and aspirations of the people that live in those countries. We set a clear goal. We're for peaceful, democratic countries who can self-govern and who are allies in the war against these terrorists. And so our military forces are there to provide security as they head to elections, and we're there to help train Afghan and Iraqi forces so they can defeat the terrorists who are trying to stop and prevent the hopes of many from emerging. Our military will complete this mission as quickly as possible so our troops do not stay a day longer than necessary. (Applause.)Our nation's commitments are kept by the men and women of our military. At bases around the country, I have had the high privilege of meeting with those who defend our country and spread the peace. I've seen their great decency and their unselfish courage. I assure you, ladies and gentlemen, the cause of freedom is in really good hands. (Applause.)I appreciate the veterans who are here today who have set such a great example for those who wear the uniform. (Applause.) Our troops must have the resources they need to fight and win the war on terror. They must have the full support of our government. That's why last September, while our troops were in combat in Afghanistan and in Iraq, I proposed supplemental funding to support them in their missions. The legislation provided money for body armor and vital equipment, hazard pay, health benefits, ammunition, fuel and spare parts. (Applause.) It was an important piece of legislation, and it received great bipartisan support. As a matter of fact, the support was so strong that only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against it.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Two of those 12 senators are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: When they asked him about that vote, he said, ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it."" (Laughter.) Doesn't sound like the way people in Albuquerque, New Mexico, talk to me, but -- (applause.) They pressed him further and he said he was proud of his vote. And they kept pressing him, he said, well, it was a complicated matter. There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)In the long run, our security is not guaranteed by force alone. We must work to change the conditions that give rise to terror: poverty had hopelessness and resentment. See, a free and peaceful Iraq and a free and peaceful Afghanistan will be powerful examples -- they'll be powerful examples to their neighbors, they'll be powerful examples in the part of the world that's desperate for liberty and freedom. (Applause.)Free countries do not export terror. Free countries do not stifle the dreams of their citizens. By serving the ideal of liberty, we're bringing hope to others, and that makes America more secure. By serving the ideal of liberty, we're spreading the peace that we all want. And by serving the ideal of liberty, we're serving the deepest ideals of our nation. We understand freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)Now, we've got more to do to protect our country. There's an enemy out there that still hates us. We have a difference of opinion on this. The other day, he said that going to war with the terrorists is actually improving their recruiting efforts. I think the logic is upside-down. I think it shows a misunderstanding of the enemy we face. See, during the 1990's, the terrorists were recruiting and they were training for war with us long before we went to war with them. They don't need an excuse for their hatred. Staying on the offense is necessary to protect this country. See, you don't create terrorists by fighting back; you defeat the terrorists by fighting back. (Applause.)There's a lot of good people working on your behalf's, a lot of good people at the federal level and the state level and the local level responding to threats. We've got work to do and we'll continue to do it to make sure that we get the best intelligence possible so we can react to the threats. We need the Patriot Act renewed. Listen, the Patriot Act is a vital tool for those who are working to disrupt the terrorist networks. (Applause.) We created the Department of Homeland Security. We're continuing to work to better safeguard our borders and our ports. We're working better between levels of government, but I got to tell you, reform isn't easy, particularly in Washington, D.C. (Laughter.) There's a lot of entrenched interest there. There's a lot of people who are willing to hold on to the status quo. It's not enough to advocate reform, you've got to be able to get the job done. So when you're out there campaigning, I want you to remind people that when it comes to reforming our schools to provide an excellent education for every child, we're getting the job done. When it comes to health care reforms for our seniors and for our families, we're getting the job done. (Applause.) When it comes to improving our economy and creating jobs, we're getting the job done. (Applause.) When it comes to better securing our homeland and fighting the forces of terror and spreading freedom and peace, we're getting the job done. (Applause.) And remind your friends and neighbors, when it comes time to choose a President, put somebody back in there who can get the job done. (Applause.)We're living in a time of change, and I understand change can be unsettling. It's an exciting time, but it's a time that government needs to change its ways of thinking. Government needs to not be giving dictates to people, government needs to be helping people. One way to do so is to understand that a lot of moms are working these days, and therefore, people need flex-time and comp-time so they can adjust their work schedules to meet the demands of family. One way to help people with changing times is to encourage an ownership society. That's why we want people owning their own health care accounts, so they can manage their own accounts and take them from job to job if they need to. (Applause.)These are changing times and they're exciting times. I see a lot of younger folks out here today. I thank you for coming, but -- (applause) -- when it comes time to think about Social Security, baby boomers like me are in good shape. (Laughter.) But some younger workers are going to have a problem because there's a lot of baby boomers, and the Social Security system needs to be made fiscally sound for you. I believe the best way to do so is to let younger workers take some of their own money in personal savings accounts so they can carry it from one generation to the next. (Applause.)We want more people owning their own business in America. You know, there's some fantastic success stories right here in Albuquerque, New Mexico, where people had a dream and they built their own companies that they can call their own. In changing times, if you own your own home, it can help provide stability. The home ownership rate is at an all-time high in America. We'll continue to pursue policies to encourage people to own their own home. There's nothing better than somebody opening that front door and saying, welcome to my house. Thank you for coming to my home. We understand in America that if you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of our country.In changing times, there are some things that won't change: our belief in liberty, our belief in opportunity, and our belief in the non-negotiable demands of human dignity. (Applause.) The individual values we try to live by shouldn't change: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. We will continue to support the institutions that give us direction and purpose -- our families, our schools, and our religious congregations. (Applause.)We stand for institutions like marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every person counts. (Applause.) We stand for judges who faithfully interpret the law, instead of legislating from the bench. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of responsibility in this country. Listen, the culture is changing from one that has said, if it feels good, just go ahead and do it, and if you've got a problem, blame somebody else, to a culture in which each of us understands we're responsible for the decisions we make in life. (Applause.)If you're fortunate enough to be a mom or a dad, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.) If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. (Applause.) If you're a CEO in corporate America, you are responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.) And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor, just like we'd like to be loved ourselves. (Applause.)I'm running for four more years to continue to rally the armies of compassion, which exist all across our country. Listen, the great strength of America is the hearts and souls of the American citizens. People are volunteering all over our country to help improve somebody's life. I met with Bernice Young. She volunteered more than 11,000 hours at the Children's Hospital of New Mexico. She's taking time out of her life to help make somebody else's life better. See, I believe societies will change. I believe our country will change, one heart, one soul, one conscience at a time, if we rally the great army of compassion, which is willing to love a neighbor. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. This is a time where we need firm resolve, clear vision, and strong belief in the values that make us a great nation. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. Rudy and I were in the ruins of the Twin Towers on September the 14th, 2001. It's a day I will never forget. It is a day Rudy will never forget. I remember the workers in hard-hats yelling at me, ""Whatever it takes, President, whatever it takes!"" I remember shaking the hand of a man who had just gotten out of the rubble. He had bloodshot eyes. He said, ""Do not let me down."" It was a -- (Applause.) I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect this country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)We have come through much together, and we've done a lot of hard work, but there's more to be done. During the next four years, we will spread ownership and opportunity to every corner of this country. We will pass the enduring values of our country to another generation. We will continue to lead the cause of freedom and peace, and we will prevail. (Applause.)With your support and prayers, I will be a leader America can count on in a time of change. Four years ago, I traveled this great country and your wonderful state asking for the vote. I said if you honored me with this great responsibility, I would uphold the dignity and the honor of the office to which I had been elected. With your help, I will do so for the next four years. God bless. Thank you for coming. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008," Thank you all very much for coming. Thanks for having me. I'm glad we came, Mr. Mayor. I'm proud to stand by your side. I am really proud to have your endorsement. (Applause.) St. Paul has got a wise and tough and principled man as the mayor of this city. I appreciate him bucking the political winds to do what he thinks is right in the  2004 campaign. (Applause.)You know, there's a lot of differences in this campaign. The other day, my opponent said he thought you could find the heart and soul of America in Hollywood. I think you can find it right here in this hall. (Applause.) I'm proud to be with the heart and soul of America tonight, and thank you for coming. I'm here to ask for the vote. I'm in this important state to let the people know I'm asking for the vote. There is more to do to make America a safer place, a stronger place, and a better place for every single citizen. (Applause.)I'm also here to thank the grassroots activists for your support. I want you to work hard to put up the signs, man the phones, register your friends and neighbors to vote. I appreciate all your hard work, and when you get them headed toward the polls, remember that George Bush and Dick Cheney are what's best for this country. (Applause.) Thank you. With your help, we will carry the great state of Minnesota. With your help, we'll achieve a great victory in November of this year. (Applause.)I only wish Laura could be here to see and hear this crowd. (Applause.) She's a wonderful mother and a great wife. Listen, I'm going to give you some reasons to put me back in, but perhaps the most important one of all is so that Laura has four more years as the First Lady. (Applause.)I'm proud of my running mate, Dick Cheney. Listen, I admit it, he's not the prettiest face in the race. (Laughter.) I didn't pick him for his looks. (Laughter.) I picked him for his judgment, his experience, his ability to get the job done. (Applause.)I'm proud to be up here with a great United States Senate, Norman Coleman. I appreciate his service. (Applause.) He's here with his dad. It's good to see you, Mr. Coleman. Thank you for being here. (Applause.) I want to thank members of the Minnesota congressional delegation who are here -- Gil Gutknecht, John Kline, and Mark Kennedy -- three fine members of the House. Thank you all for coming. Proud you're here. (Applause.)I want to thank Pat Anderson and Erik Paulsen for coming. I want to thank all the elected officials who are here. Thank you for serving your state and your community. I appreciate Laura Ingraham for being the emcee of this fine event. (Applause.) I want to thank all the veterans who are here tonight. I appreciate you coming. I want to thank my friend, Joe Repya. (Applause.) I want to thank the Minnesota Teen Challenge Choir for joining us tonight. (Applause.) Thank you all for coming. And I appreciate my friend, Ricky Skaggs, for being here, as well. (Applause.)Most of all, thank you all for taking time out of your day to come by and say hello. I appreciate it. (Applause.) It means a lot. It means a lot. You know, in the past few years we've been through a lot together. We've accomplished a great deal. But there's only one reason to look backward at the record, and that's to determine who best to lead this nation forward. (Applause.) I'm asking for the vote because so much is at stake. We have so much more to do to move this nation forward. We've got more to do to create jobs and to improve our schools. We've got more to do to protect our homeland and spread the peace. We've made much progress and there is more to do.We have more to do to make our public schools the centers of excellence we all know they can be so that no child is left behind in America. (Applause.) You know, when we came to office three-and-a-half years ago, too many of the children were being shuffled grade to grade, year after year, without learning the basics. We challenged the soft bigotry of low expectations. We've raised the bar. We believe in accountability so we know whether or not our children can read and write and add and subtract. We're willing to challenge the status quo if our children are being failed in America. (Applause.)There's more work to do. We want our high schools to issue a diploma that means something. We want to encourage math and science so our children have the schools necessary to work in the -- for the jobs of the 21st century. We'll bring the Internet to high-level -- for high-level training in the classrooms. What I'm telling you is, after four more years, a rising generation will have the confidence and the skills necessary to realize the great promise of America. (Applause.)We have more to do to make quality health care available and affordable. You might remember the old debates on Medicare. Year after year, the politicians would promise you a modernized Medicare system. We got the job done. (Applause.) Beginning in 2006, all seniors on Medicare will be able to choose the plan that suits their needs and gives them coverage for prescription drugs. We've done more. We've expanded community health centers for low-income Americans so they can get primary care in places other than emergency rooms in your hospitals. We've created health savings accounts so families can save tax-free for their own health care needs. When it comes to giving Americans more choices for their own health care and making health care more affordable, we are moving America forward. (Applause.)Most Americans get their health care coverage through their work. Most of today's new jobs are created by small businesses, which too often cannot afford to provide health care. To help more American families get health insurance, we must allow small employers to join together to purchase insurance at the discounts that big companies are able to do. (Applause.)We'll harness technology to reduce costs and prevent mistakes. We'll do more to expand research and seek new cures. And to make sure we've got available and affordable health care, we must have medical liability reform. (Applause.) I don't think you can be pro-doctor and pro-patient and pro-plaintiff attorney at the same time. I think you have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. I made my choice. I stand with the patients and doctors. I support medical liability reform now. (Applause.) In all we do to improve health care in America, we'll make sure the health decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)And there's more work to be done to make our economy stronger. Our economy's been through a lot. We've been through a recession. We've been through a terror attack that some estimated cost us a million jobs. We've been through corporate scandals. But we've overcome these obstacles, because the spirit of America is strong. We've got great workers, great farmers, great small business owners. (Applause.) And we've overcome these obstacles because of well-timed tax cuts. (Applause.)You know, we didn't pick winners or losers when it came to tax relief. We did it the fair way. We said, if you pay federal income taxes, you ought to get relief. (Applause.) We helped our families with children. We reduced the marriage penalty. It's a bad tax system that penalizes marriage. We ought to be encouraging marriage in America. (Applause.) We helped our small businesses, and this time, the check actually was in the mail. (Applause.) Because we acted, our economy has, since last summer, has grown at a rate as fast as any in nearly 20 years. Because we acted, America has added 1.5 million new jobs since last August and the unemployment rate is down to 5.5 percent. (Applause.) Because we acted, Minnesota's unemployment rate is at 4.4 percent. (Applause.) When it comes to creating jobs, or moving America forward, and we're not going to turn back. (Applause.)Our farm economy is strong, and I intend to keep it that way. (Applause.) I appreciate the farmers who are here today.There's more work to be done to make sure that we've got jobs here in America. Listen, we need an energy plan. I submitted a plan to the United States Congress nearly two years ago; it needs to get to my desk -- an energy plan that encourages conservation, renewable sources of energy; an energy plan that encourages the exploration of natural resources here close to home in environmentally friendly ways. But one thing is certain: For the sake of economic security, and the sake of national security, we must become less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)We got to make sure our workers have the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. That's why I'm a strong backer of lifetime learning for America's workers and the smart utilization of our community college system here in this country.In order to make sure we've got jobs here in America, we need reasonable regulations on our business creators, our job creators. We need tort reform. In order to keep jobs here in America, we've got to make sure we open up markets for Minnesota products, and reject economic isolationism. In order to keep jobs here in America, we've got to be wise about how we spend your money, and keep your taxes low. (Applause.)We have a difference in opinion on this campaign about taxes. My opponent said that he's going to -- he promised about over $2 trillion of new programs. And so we said, well, how are you going to pay for it? He said, well, I'll pay for it by taxing the rich. You've heard that before, haven't you? You've heard that line. That's why people hire accountants and lawyers, so you won't be able to tax them. You can't raise enough money to pay for all his spending by so-called taxing the rich. He's going to try to stick you with the tax bill. We're not going to let him raise your taxes. He's not going to win. (Applause.) When you put me back into office for four more years, I'll continue to pursue a pro-growth, pro-entrepreneur, pro-farmer agenda that enables America to remain the strongest economy in the industrialized world. (Applause.)We have more to do to wage and win the war against terror. America's future depends on our willingness to lead in the world. If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This is not going to happen on my watch. (Applause.)The world changed on a terrible September morning, and since that day, we have changed the world. Before September the 11th, Afghanistan served as the home base of al Qaeda, which trained and deployed thousands of killers to set up terror cells in dozens of countries, including our own. Because we acted, Afghanistan is a rising democracy, Afghanistan is an ally in the war against the terrorists, and many young girls go to school for the first time in their lives. (Applause.) Because we acted, America and the world are safer.Before September the 11th, the ruler in Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Today, because America and our allies have sent a strong and easy to understand message, the leader of Libya abandoned his pursuit of weapons of mass destruction, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, the ruler of Iraq was a sworn enemy of America. He was defying the world. He was firing weapons at American pilots who were enforcing the world's sanctions. He had pursued and used weapons of mass destruction. He harbored terrorists. He invaded his neighbors. He subsidized the families of suicide bombers. He murdered tens of thousands of his own citizens. He was a source of great instability in the world's most volatile region. Saddam Hussein was a threat. (Applause.)One of the important lessons that we must never forget, is that after September the 11th, we must take threats seriously before they fully materialize. (Applause.) I recognize that. I realized that and so I went to the United States Congress and said, I believe there is a threat in Iraq. Members of the Congress, the House and the Senate, members of both political parties, including my opponent, came to the same conclusion: Saddam Hussein was a threat. Listen, the hardest decision a President ever makes is to commit those who wear our uniform into combat. It's a hard decision. And it ought to be the last option for a President. So I went to the United Nations. And I said to the United Nations, I said, I believe there's a threat. They looked at the same intelligence, they remembered the same history, and came to the same conclusion. They passed a resolution, 15 to nothing, that said that Saddam Hussein disclose, disarm or face serious consequences.The world spoke. But as he had for over a decade, Saddam Hussein defied the world. He wasn't about to disclose or disarm, because he didn't think there were serious consequences. As a matter of fact, we sent -- we didn't -- the U.N. sent inspectors into Iraq, but he systematically deceived the inspectors. I knew he was systematically deceiving the inspectors, as did others. So I had a choice to make: either to forget the lessons of September the 11th and trust a madman who is a sworn enemy of America, or take action necessary to defend this country. Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)Even though we did not find the stockpiles that we expected to find, I want you to remember that Saddam Hussein had the capability of making weapons, and he could have passed that capability on to our enemies. And that was a risk we could not afford to take after September the 11th. (Applause.) Knowing what I know today, I would have taken the same course of action. America and the world are safer with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. (Applause.)Now, almost two years after he voted for the war in Iraq, and seven months after switching positions to declare himself the anti-war candidate, my opponent has found a new nuance -- he now agrees it was the right decision to go into Iraq. After months of questioning my motives, and even my credibility, the Massachusetts Senator now agrees with me that even though we have not found the stockpiles of weapons we all believed were there, knowing everything we know today, he would have voted to go into Iraq and remove Saddam Hussein from power. I appreciate him clarifying his position. (Laughter and applause.) There are -- however -- however, there are still 76 days left in the campaign for him to change his mind. (Applause.)We have more to do. I'm running because I understand there's more work to be done. We must continue to work with friends and allies around the world to aggressively pursue the terrorists in Afghanistan, Iraq, and elsewhere. See, you can't talk sense to these people. You can't negotiate with them. You cannot hope for the best. We must engage these enemies around the world so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)America will continue to lead the world with confidence and moral clarity. We put together a strong coalition to join us in the defeat of our enemies. Listen, there's nearly 40 nations involved in Afghanistan, some 30 nations involved in Iraq. I appreciate the sacrifices the moms and dads and husbands and wives of those countries are making, alongside those of our country to secure our freedom. (Applause.) We will continue to build alliances and work with our friends for the cause of security and peace. I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)We will keep our commitments to help Afghanistan an Iraq become peaceful democratic societies. See, these two nations are now governed by strong leaders who believe in the hopes and aspirations of their people. And we have a clear goal in those two countries: peaceful and democratic societies which are allies of our in the war on terror. We will help those people meet those goals by providing security as the political process moves forward. We will help them train their own troops, so they can step up and do the hard work necessary for a free society. Our military will complete this mission as quickly as possible so our troops do not stay a day longer than necessary. (Applause.)We have a difference of opinion as to how to handle this issue in Iraq. After all, my opponent said the other day that if he's elected, the number of troops in Iraq will be significantly reduced within six months. I don't think it's a wise statement. You see, it sends the wrong signal. I mean, after all, the enemy says, fine, I'll wait six months and one day. It sends the wrong signal to our troops. It sends the wrong signal to the Iraqis. See, they're watching carefully. They wonder whether or not we will stand with them as they do the hard work for a free society to emerge. So long as I am the President, when America gives its word, America will keep its word. (Applause.)In these crucial times, our commitments are kept by the men and women that wear our uniform. I'm really proud of our military. We've got a fantastic military. (Applause.) I've traveled our country and met with our troops. I've seen their great decency and their unselfish courage. Ladies and gentlemen, I can assure you the cause of freedom is in really good hands. (Applause.)I have made a commitment to them and to their loved ones: our troops will have the resources they need to fight and win the war against the terrorists. (Applause.) So last September I went to the Congress, while our troops were in combat in Afghanistan and Iraq, and I proposed supplemental funding to support them in their mission. This was an important piece of legislation. It was money for body armor and vital equipment, for hazard pay, for health benefits, ammunition, fuel and spare parts. We received great bipartisan support. Members of both political parties recognized that when you had people in harm's way, they deserve the full support of government. As a matter of fact, it was such good bipartisan support only 12 members of the United States Senate voted against it -- two of whom are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: So they asked him to explain his vote. He said: Well, I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it. (Laughter.) I don't think they talk that way in St. Paul, Minnesota. (Applause.) They pressed him on the vote and he said, well, he's proud of the vote. Then he finally said, the whole thing is a complicated matter. There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)In the long run, our security is not guaranteed by force, alone. We'll work to change the conditions that give rise to terror: poverty and hopelessness and resentment. You see, a free and peaceful Iraq, and a free and peaceful Afghanistan will serve as powerful examples in a part of the world that is desperate for freedom. (Applause.) Free countries do not export terror. Free countries do not stifle the dreams of their citizens. By serving the ideal of liberty, we're bringing hope to others, and that makes America more secure. By serving the ideal of liberty, we're spreading the peace that we all want. (Applause.) And by serving the ideal of liberty, we're serving the deepest ideals of America. We understand freedom is not America's gift to the world. Freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)We have more to do to protect America. There are enemies who hate us, and they're still plotting. It's the reality of the world we live in today. We have a difference of opinion about these folks. My opponent says that going to war with the terrorists is actually improving their recruiting efforts. I think the logic is wrong. I think is shows a misunderstanding of the enemy we face. See, during the 1990s, the terrorists were recruiting and training for war with us long before we went to war with them. (Applause.) They don't need an excuse for their hatred. I think it's wrong to blame the actions of our country for the anger and evil of those killers. (Applause.) You don't create terrorists by fighting back. We defeat the terrorists by fighting back. (Applause.)We're working hard here at home to protect you. There's a lot of really good, decent people at the federal level, the state level, the first responders here in St. Paul, Minnesota, that are working long hours to do everything we can to protect the American people. This is our most solemn duty. It's what we're called to do. We created the new Department of Homeland Security. We passed the Patriot Act. The Patriot Act is necessary for law enforcement to be able to protect you. (Applause.) We're integrating intelligence and law enforcement better than before. I've already taken a lot of action on a majority of the 9/11 Commission recommendations. We're working hard to secure our ports and our borders, to train first responders, to improve dramatically our intelligence-gathering capability.We're working on reform. It's not easy in Washington to reform things. There's a lot of entrenched interests there. There's a lot of people interested in defending the status quo. You see, it's not enough to advocate reform; you have to be able to get the job done. (Applause.)When it comes to reforming our schools to provide excellent education for every child, we're getting the job done. (Applause.) When it comes to health care reforms to get families and seniors more access and more choices, we're getting the job done. (Applause.) When it comes to improving our economy and creating quality jobs, we're getting the job done. (Applause.) When it comes to better securing the homeland and spreading freedom and peace, we are getting the job done. What I'm saying to you is, when it comes to electing a President, put somebody back in the White House who can get the job done. (Applause.)You know, we live in a time -- we live in a time of rapid change. These are exciting times, and times have changed. It's important for government to help by standing side by side with families and workers. And a great way to do that is to promote an ownership society. I'll continue to promote ownership in America. Listen, it's important for people to own their own health care account so if they change jobs, they can take their own health care account with them. If you're a younger worker -- of you're a younger worker, you ought to be concerned about the fiscal stability of Social Security. Old baby-boomers like me are okay, but for younger workers, there's a question about the fiscal solvency of Social Security, and therefore, I think you ought to be given the choice to have a personal savings account and Social Security to call your own. (Applause.)You know, one of the great -- one of the heartening statistics of our country today is ownership rates are at an all-time high. It's a fantastic thought when you think more and more Americans from all walks of life are opening the door, saying, welcome to my home, welcome to my piece of property. We want more people to own things. We want to create an environment so more people own their own business. We want the small business sector of our economy to remain vibrant and strong. The reason why I continue to promote an ownership society in America is because I understand if you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of the United States of America. (Applause.)In changing times there's some things that won't change -- our belief in liberty and opportunity and the non-negotiable demands of human dignity; the individual values we try to live by -- courage and compassion, reference and integrity; the institutions that give us direction and purpose -- our families, our schools, and our religious congregations. We stand for institutions like marriage and family which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matter and every person counts. We stand for judges who faithfully interpret the law, instead of legislating from the bench. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of responsibility in America.Listen, the culture of our country is changing from one that has said, if it feels good do it, and if you've got a problem, blame somebody else, to a culture in which each of us understands we're responsible for the decisions we make in life. If you're fortunate enough to be a mom or a dad, you are responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.) If you're worried about the quality of the education in your community, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.) And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourselves.I'm running for four more years to continue to rally the armies of compassion all across America. See, I understand the limitations of government. Government can hand out money, but government cannot put love in a person's heart, or a sense of purpose in a person's life. That happens when a loving soul puts their arm around somebody who hurts and says, I love you. What can I do to help you? I want to walk with you. I want to stand with you. You see, I believe, by rallying the armies of compassion, we can change America one heart, one soul, one conscience at a time, to make sure this great American experience is available to all our citizens. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. This is a time where we need firm resolve, clear vision, and a deep belief in the values that make us a great country. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I'll never forget. Workers in hard-hats were yelling at me, ""Whatever it takes."" I remember shaking people's hands and a guy looked me in the eye, his bloodshot eyes, he'd just come out of the rubble, saying, ""Do not let me down."" It was a powerful day. You know, I came away from that site recognizing that everybody there searching through the rubble took that day personally. My fellow citizens took it personally. I took it personally. I have a duty that goes on. Every day that I wake up, I think about how best to secure our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)We have come through much together. We've done a lot of hard work. But there's more work to be done to move this country forward. During the next four years, we will spread opportunity and ownership throughout every corner of our country. We will pass the enduring values of our country to another generation. We will continue to work to spread freedom and peace.You know, when I campaigned in your state four years ago, I asked -- when I was asking for the vote, I made a pledge to the people of Minnesota and the people of our country, that if you honored me with this great responsibility, I would uphold the dignity and the honor of the office to which I had been elected. (Applause.) And with your help, and with your hard work, I will do so for four more years.Thanks for coming. God bless. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"  Thank you all very much. Thanks for the warm welcome. And thanks for inviting me for your 105th  national convention. I'm proud to be here. (Applause.)One of the great honors of being Commander-in-Chief is meeting the courageous men and women who stand watch for freedom. Nothing gives me greater pleasure than to look them in the eye and say on behalf of our country, thank you for your service. (Applause.) The same is true of each of you here today. When the enemies of freedom were on the march, and our country and the world needed brave Americans to take up arms and stop their advance, you stepped forward to serve. And today, I'm proud to stand before you as Commander-in-Chief, look you in the eye, and say, America thanks you for your service. (Applause.)I want to thank Ed Banas for his service in being an effective commander of the VFW. I appreciate the job he's done, and I want to thank his wife, Sandra, for standing by his side during this important time for the VFW. Ed, thank you, sir, for your service. (Applause.)I also thank my friend, Bob Wallace, the Executive Director of the VFW. I want to thank Governor Bob Taft for joining us today, from the state of Ohio; my friend, Tony Principi -- I'll say something about him here in a minute; and Congressman Rob Portman, Congressman from Ohio is with us, as well. I'm honored that these elected officials -- and in Principi's case, appointed official -- is with us today.I want to thank John Furgess, the incoming VFW National Commander-in-Chief, and Alma. I want to thank Evelyn McCune, the VFW Ladies Auxiliary National President, and her husband, Don. I want to thank JoAnne Ott. I want to thank the VFW and Ladies Auxiliary members for letting me come and address you. (Applause.)In the audience today are two people I've gotten to know during a very traumatic period during their lives. Carolyn and Keith Maupin are with us today. They're from this part of the world. Their son, Matt, has been missing in action for four months in Iraq. I have vowed to them we will do everything we can to find their loved one, Matt. I appreciate their courage. I continue to send my prayers to these two fine Americans during these difficult times for them. May God bless you, Keith and Carolyn. (Applause.)The Veterans of Foreign Wars have always stood up for our nation and those who wear the uniform. Since your founding in 1899, the members of the VFW have been serving the men and women who served America. I appreciate your dedication. The VFW and its Ladies Auxiliary are volunteering by transporting sick and disabled vets to and from their medical appointments. You're showing great compassion. You're supporting the men and women who serve today. Some 1,500 VFW posts have adopted military units deployed in Afghanistan, Iraq, and other distant theaters. You've distributed more than 3.5 million pre-paid calling cards to our deployed forces. You've sent thousands of care packages to our troops in the field. You've helped the families back home with groceries and home repairs, and other necessities. America respects our military and their families. I thank you for showing that respect every day. (Applause.)All our nation's veterans have made serving America the highest priority of their lives, and serving our veterans is one of the highest priorities of my administration. (Applause.) To make sure my administration fulfills the commitments I have made to America's veterans, I selected one of the finest men ever to serve as the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, a combat-decorated Vietnam veteran, Secretary Tony Principi. (Applause.)Thanks in large part to Tony's leadership, my administration has a solid record of accomplishment for our veterans. When my 2005 budget is approved by Congress, we will have increased overall funding for our nation's veterans by almost $20 billion, or 40 percent, since 2001. (Applause.) We have increased funding for our veterans more in four years than the previous administration did in eight years. (Applause.) To provide health care to veterans, we've increased VA medical care funding by 41 percent over the past four years.We are bringing care to more veterans more quickly. Since 2001, we've enrolled 2.5 million more veterans in health care services. We've increased out-patient visits from 44 million to 54 million. We've increased the number of prescriptions filled from 98 million to 116 million. We're getting the job done. (Applause.) We've reduced the large backlog of disability claims by about a third; we will reduce it even further. We've cut the average time it takes to process disability claims by 70 days.We have focused resources on the veterans who need it most, those with service-related disabilities and low incomes and special needs. We've established a new scheduling system to make certain that veterans seeking care for a service-connected condition are first in line. For more than a century, federal law prohibited disabled veterans from receiving both their military retired pay and their VA disability compensation. Combat-injured and severely disabled veterans deserve better. I was proud to be the first President in over 100 years to sign concurrent receipt legislation. (Applause.) We're getting the job done in Washington, D.C.My administration has launched a $35 million program to provide housing and health care and other support services to homeless veterans. No veteran who served in the blazing heat or bitter cold of foreign lands should have to live without shelter, exposed to the elements, in the very country whose freedom they fought for. (Applause.)We are modernizing VA health centers, and building new ones, especially in the South and West, where increasing numbers of our veterans live. Since 2001, we have opened 194 new community-based clinics nationwide. And through the CARES initiative, we are providing $1 billion -- and have requested another half-billion for next year -- to modernize VA facilities, and to provide better care for veterans in areas where the need is growing, including here in Ohio. (Applause.)Our VA hospitals are, on average, 50 years old. That's why we are modernizing our facilities to make sure our veterans have 21st century health care. For example, here in Ohio, we're building one of the largest new VA clinics in America in Columbus, Ohio. We're spending more than $100 million to consolidate two VA hospitals in Cleveland into a single 21st century facility. When it comes to providing first-class care for our nation's veterans, we are getting the job done. (Applause.)Our nation's debt extends not just to the veterans who served, but to the families who supported them in war and depend on them today. Last December, I signed the Veterans Benefits Act, authorizing $1 billion in new and expanded benefits for disabled veterans, and surviving spouses and their children.America's veterans have defended America in hours of need. And to honor the veterans from the Second World War for their service to our country, the World War II Memorial now stands on the Washington Mall. And I thank you for your efforts and your hard work to get this memorial built. And we honor all of those here today who fought to defend freedom in the Second World War. (Applause.)Like the Second World War, the war we face today began with a ruthless, surprise attack on America. The world changed on that September morning. And since that day, we have changed the world. (Applause.) Before September the 11th, Afghanistan served as the home base of al Qaeda, which trained and deployed thousands of killers to set up terrorist cells around the world, including our own country. Because we acted, Afghanistan is a rising democracy; Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror; Afghanistan is now a place where many young girls go to school for the first time. America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Today, because America and our allies sent a clear and strong message, the leader of Libya has abandoned his pursuit of weapons of mass destruction. America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, the ruler of Iraq was a sworn enemy of America. He was defying the world. He was firing weapons at American pilots who were enforcing the world's sanctions. He had pursued and he had used weapons of mass destruction. He had harbored terrorists. He invaded his neighbors. He subsidized the families of suicide bombers. He murdered tens of thousands of his own citizens. He was a source of instability in the world's most volatile region. He was a threat.One of the lessons of September the 11th, a lesson this nation must never forget, is that we must deal with threats before they fully materialize. (Applause.) I remembered what Saddam Hussein was like; I looked at the intelligence. I called upon Congress to remember his history and look at the intelligence. I thought it was important to bring Congress, get their opinion on the subject of Saddam Hussein. So members of both political parties, including my opponent, looked at the same intelligence and came to the same conclusion that I came to: Saddam Hussein was a threat. I went to the United Nations; the U.N. Security Council looked at the intelligence and came to the same conclusion, Saddam Hussein was a threat. As a matter of fact, they passed a resolution, 15 to nothing, which said to Saddam: disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences. As he had for the past 12 years, he refused to comply. He ignored the demands of the free world. He systematically deceived the weapons inspectors.So I had a choice to make: either forget the lessons of September the 11th and trust a madman, or take action to defend America. Given that choice, I will defend our country every time. (Applause.)Even though we did not find the stockpiles that we thought we would find, Saddam Hussein had the capability to make weapons of mass destruction, and he could have passed that capability on to our enemy, to the terrorists. It is not a risk, after September the 11th, that we could afford to take. Knowing what I know today, I would have taken the same action. America and the world are safer because Saddam Hussein sits in a prison cell. (Applause.)We have more hard work to do. I'll continue to work with friends and allies around the world to aggressively pursue the terrorists in Iraq and Afghanistan and elsewhere. See, you can't talk sense to these people. You cannot negotiate with them. You cannot hope for the best. We must aggressively pursue them and defeat them in foreign lands, so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)America will continue to lead the world with confidence and moral clarity. We have put together a strong coalition to help us pursue the terrorists and spread the peace. There are over 40 nations involved in Afghanistan, some 30 nations involved in Iraq. I appreciate the sacrifices of the mothers and fathers from those countries, to have their sons and daughters stand with our troops to spread freedom and peace. I'll continue to build on those alliances and work with our friends for the cause of security and peace. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)We'll keep our commitments in Afghanistan and Iraq; we'll help them become peaceful and democratic societies. These two nations are now governed by strong leaders, they're on the path to elections. We set a clear goal, and Iraq and Afghanistan will be peaceful and democratic countries that are allies in the war on terror. We will meet that goal by helping secure their countries, to allowing a peaceful political process to develop, and by training Afghan and Iraqi forces so they can make the hard decisions, so they can defend their country against those who are preventing the spread of freedom. Our military will complete this mission as quickly as possible so our troops do not stay a day longer than necessary. (Applause.)It's important we send the right signals when we speak here in America. The other day, my opponent said if he's elected, the number of troops in Iraq will be significantly reduced within six months. I think it sends the wrong message -- it sends the wrong signal to the enemy. They could easily wait six months and one day. It sends the wrong message to our troops, that completing the mission may not be necessary. It sends the wrong message to the Iraqi people who wonder whether or not America means what it says. Our friends and allies must know that when America speaks, we mean what we say. We will stay until the job is completed. (Applause.)In the long run, our security is not guaranteed by force along. We will work to change the conditions that give rise to terror: poverty and hopelessness and resentment. A free and peaceful Iraq and a free and peaceful Afghanistan will be powerful, and examples in a neighborhood that is desperate for freedom. You see, by serving the ideal of liberty, we are bringing hope to others, and that makes America more secure. By serving the ideal of liberty, we're spreading the peace. Free countries do not export terror; free countries are peaceful countries. And by serving the ideal of liberty, we're serving the deepest ideals of America. We believe that freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)These are crucial times. We have an historic opportunity to win the war on terror by spreading freedom and peace. Our commitments are being kept by the men and women of our military. I've had the privilege of traveling to bases around our country and around the world. I've seen their great decency and their unselfish courage. I assure you, ladies and gentlemen, the cause of freedom is in really good hands. (Applause.)Those who wear our uniform deserve the full support of our government. For almost four years, my administration has strengthened our military. We have enacted the largest increases in defense spending since Ronald Reagan served as the Commander-in-Chief. We've increased military pay by 21 percent. We have provided better housing and better training and better maintenance.And last September, while our troops were in combat in Afghanistan and Iraq, I wanted to make sure they had the very best, so I proposed supplemental funding to support them in their mission. The legislation provided funding for body armor and vital equipment, hazard pay, health benefits, ammunition, fuel, and spare parts. The VFW strongly supported my request. I thank you for standing up for our troops. Your work on Capitol Hill paid off; after all, the funding received strong bipartisan support -- so strong that in the United States Senate, only 12 members voted against the funding, two of whom were my opponent and his running mate. (Applause.)When pressed, he explained his vote -- ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it."" (Laughter.) He went on to say he was proud of the vote, and the whole thing is a ""complicated"" matter. There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)We have more work to do to defend freedom and protect our country. We will ensure that our forces are well-prepared, and well-positioned to meet the threats of the future. Our Armed Forces have changed a lot. They're more agile and more lethal, they're better able to strike anywhere in the world over great distances on short notice. Yet for decades, America's Armed Forces abroad have essentially remained where the wars of the last century ended, in Europe and in Asia. America's current force posture was designed, for example, to protect us and our allies from Soviet aggression -- the threat no longer exists.More than three years ago, we launched a comprehensive review of America's global force posture -- the numbers, types, locations, and capabilities of U.S. forces around the world. We've consulted closely with our allies and with Congress; we've examined the challenges posed by today's threats and emerging threats. And so, today I announce a new plan for deploying America's Armed Forces.Over the coming decade, we'll deploy a more agile and more flexible force, which means that more of our troops will be stationed and deployed from here at home. We'll move some of our troops and capabilities to new locations, so they can surge quickly to deal with unexpected threats. We'll take advantage of 21st century military technologies to rapidly deploy increased combat power.The new plan will help us fight and win these wars of the 21st century. It will strengthen our alliances around the world, while we build new partnerships to better preserve the peace. It will reduce the stress on our troops and our military families. Although we'll still have a significant presence overseas, under the plan I'm announcing today, over the next 10 years, we will bring home about 60,000 to 70,000 uniformed personnel, and about 100,000 members and civilian employees -= family members and civilian employees.See, our service members will have more time on the home front, and more predictability and fewer moves over a career. Our military spouses will have fewer job changes, greater stability, more time for their kids and to spend with their families at home. The taxpayers will save money, as we configure our military to meet the threats of the 21st century. There will be savings as we consolidate and close bases and facilities overseas no longer needed to face the threats of our time and defend the peace.The world has changed a great deal, and our posture must change with it, for the sake of our military families, for the sake of our taxpayers, and so we can be more effective at projecting our strength and spreading freedom and peace. (Applause.)Today, our troops have the most advanced technologies at their disposal -- weapons are more lethal, more precise than were available for you. Our troops are more mobile, they can communicate better. Yet their success in the wars we fight is being made possible by the same thing that made your success possible: personal courage, love of country, dedication to duty.As our troops fight today in Baghdad and Najaf, and the Hindu Kush mountains and elsewhere, I know America's veterans feel a special pride in them. They're carrying on your legacy of sacrifice and service. They're determined to see the mission through. This country stands with them.I want to thank you for the example you have set for our men and women in uniform. I want to thank you for your idealism, for your dedication to God and our country. May God bless you all. And may God continue to bless the United States of America. (Applause.) Thank you all very much. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"  Thank you, Ernest. Thank you for having me. I appreciate the invitation. It's good that -- Ernest tells me that there's nearly 10,000 members of your organization. I congratulate you for reaching out and including a lot of people. You represent a very important profession --  it's one that I'm quite familiar with. (Laughter.)I appreciate the chance to -- I deal with my press corps on a regular basis. It's a beneficial -- it's a mutual beneficial society. See, I need them to get the message out, and they need me to be a messenger. And we're working hard to make sure that our relationship is cordial and professional. And that's how I feel about coming here, too -- to establish a cordial and professional relationship with people who help spread the news.You believe there ought to be diversity in the newsroom. I understand that. You believe there ought to be diversity on the editorial pages of America. I agree. You believe there ought to be diversity behind the managing editor's desk. I agree with that, too. I also believe there ought to be diversity in the political parties in America, and that's why I'm going to work hard to tell people my message, to tell people what I believe. And I believe that government should stand side by side with people and help them gain the tools necessary to realize the American Dream -- not just some people, but everybody.I believe those of us who have been given the high honor of representing the people must work to reform parts of government that are stagnant and don't stand side by side with people to give them the tools necessary to perform. I believe it's more important to be a doer than a talker. I believe it's important to say to people, judge me by my results. And so today I want to talk about some of the results of this administration, and then I look forward to answering some of your questions.First, I want to thank the board of directors of this August organization. Thank you for having me. Thank you for greeting me behind stage. I want to thank the sponsor for providing the opportunity for people from all around the globe to come here -- all around the country, to come here to talk about important issues.I think one -- you know, look, you can't read a newspaper if you can't read. And so one of the most important initiatives of this administration was to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations. You know what I mean by that. If you lower the bar, guess what happens -- you get lousy results. And that's the way it was in American public schools three-and-a-half years ago. That's why you had kids just shuffled from grade to grade, year to year, without learning the basics of education. That's the way it was, because there was no accountability. See, we weren't measuring.If you believe that every child can learn to read and write and add and subtract, which I believe, then you must be willing to measure to determine whether or not the children are learning to read and write and add and subtract. No, here in this -- here in this capital there's a lot of focus on funding, but very little focus on results. We increased for funding for K through 12 by 49 percent since 2001. We increased funding for Title I by 52 percent since 2001. But now, in return for increased funding, we're saying to local districts, show us whether or not a child can read, early, before it's too late. We're measuring.And when there are schools that aren't teaching, there's extra help to make sure the children learn early, before it's too late. We've raised the bar. We believe in local control of schools, and we're insisting on accountability. And you know what? It's beginning to work.There is a reading gap in America. We can play like there's not a reading gap in America, but there is. Too many of our African American kids cannot read at grade level by the 3rd and 4th grade, and that's not right for America. Too many Latino youngsters can't read. And one of the reasons why is because it's so easy to quit on a classroom full of inner-city kids and kids whose parents maybe can't speak English as a first language. It's easy to walk in and say, these kids are too hard to educate, let's just move them through. We stopped the practice in America, and the schools are better off for it.I'll tell you one other thing we've done, which I think is important, is we've started the process of giving parents more choice in schools. If your public school fails after a period of time, you ought to be allowed to move your child to another school. Why should a parent have their child trapped in a school that won't change? That doesn't make any sense to me.Here in the District of Columbia, we've given $7,500 scholarships to the parents of low-income children so that they can move their kid from school to school -- to another school if the public school is failing. I appreciate working with the mayor of this city. See, my attitude is, if public -- or school choice is good enough for the middle class and the upper class, it ought to be good enough for low-income Americans. And this is going to make a difference in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)No, we're making a difference here in the public schools of America. In a recent study of 61 urban school districts, 73 percent of African American 4th graders narrowed the achievement gap with white students in reading. See, that's how you -- you know how you know that? Because you measured. Because we say, show us whether or not a child can read, and, if not, let's correct problems early, before it's too late.We're making progress in this country. About 60 percent of Hispanic 4th graders narrowed the achievement gap. So long as there's an achievement gap, we've got more work to do. But we're making substantial progress toward achieving what we want to do, and that is every child reading at grade level by the 3rd grade and remaining at grade level throughout their entire public school career.There's more to do. We've got to make sure our higher education is available for everybody. We've increased the number of students receiving Pell grants by a million since I've been President. We've got historic levels of funding for our black colleges. I told the Native Americans we will see that their school systems are modernized. We spent $1.1 billion for Indian school construction repair since 2001, more than double spending in the previous four years. I told people we'd focus on schools, and we are. And we're making progress in America.You know, when I came into office we had a problem with our economy, it was in a recession. In order to make sure this country is hopeful and people have a better chance to realize their dreams, we need economic growth. That's why I cut the taxes on everybody. I didn't cut them, the Congress cut them. I asked them to cut them. It was to stimulate the economy. It was to help people have more money in their pocket, so they would demand additional goods or services.And the economic growth is strong and it's getting stronger, and that's good for everybody in America. I want you to remember the tax relief and how it worked. We didn't play favorites in the tax code. We said, if you're paying taxes you ought to get relief. Seems to make a fair way to me to make policy. If you're paying taxes, you're going to have tax relief and the government ought not to pay [sic] favorites.So everybody who paid taxes got relief. We paid special attention to parents with children. We raised the child credit. We provided relief for the marriage penalty. It's an unusual tax code that penalizes marriage. Seems like we ought to be trying to encourage marriage in America, not penalize it. A lot of our tax relief was aimed at small businesses. Most new jobs in America are created by small businesses. Most small businesses pay tax at the individual income tax level. That's just a fact. By far, the majority of small businesses in America are what they call sole proprietorships or sub-chapter S corporations.Since most new jobs in America are created by small businesses it makes sense to provide relief for small business owners. And so when you cut the taxes on individuals, you're cutting taxes on, by far, the vast majority of small businesses in America. And that's good for the economy.It's also good to encourage an ownership society. I came to Washington aiming to help people own something. I want there to be more owners in America. The role of government is not to create wealth, but an environment in which the entrepreneur can flourish. At least, that's my philosophy. And as a result of tax relief, and a good economic environment, there are more small minority owners -- business owners today than ever before. More and more people are realizing their dreams by owning their own business, and that's healthy for this country. It's important for this country.And there's more work to do. You've heard me talk about tort reform. Tort reform is necessary to make sure the business environment is such that people have the confidence necessary to start their own business. Good trade policy will help small businesses. We regulate a lot here in Washington, D.C. I can't promise you whether or not any regulator has ever read the reports that we ask small business owners to file in Washington. I suspect they haven't. But reasonable regulatory policy will help small business owners.Small business owners must be able to afford health care. That's why I strongly urge the Congress to pass association health plans, which will allow small businesses to pool risk across jurisdictional boundaries so they can get the same purchasing power that big businesses have. I have got a plan that will help all small businesses thrive in America. When you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of this country. Judge me on home ownership in America. I believe it's -- I can't tell you how exciting it is to know, more people in America can now say, welcome to my home; I'm glad you're here to visit me in my home. To me, those are hopeful words for our country.I set a goal two summers ago to have 5.5 million new home owners by the end of the decade, minority home owners by the end of the decade. We're meeting that goal. One point six million new minority home owners in the last two years. You know, they talk a good game up here sometimes in Washington. We're delivering. More minority families own their home today than ever before in the history of the United States of America. And that's a positive development for this country. (Applause.) A lot of it has to do with low interest rates. A lot of it has to do with good tax policy. A lot of it has to do with down payment assistance, counseling out of Housing and Urban Development. Listen, if you're a first-time home owner and you take a look at the contract, that fine print looks a little small; people get a little nervous. And so we're providing counseling to help people to understand what it means to be a first-time home buyer. And it's paying off.Medicare, there's been a lot of talk about Medicare here in Washington, D.C. You might remember that issue. At every single political campaign people said, I want to help our seniors, I'll help our seniors. Nothing got done. We got it done. We reformed a very important part of our health care system by enabling seniors to have choices of their own and providing prescription drug coverage for seniors for the first time, in Medicare. They talk a lot up here. I want the people of this country to remember who actually has got the work done.Now, let me tell you about the Medicare bill, the reform bill. It started off first by the distribution of drug discount cards, which provide real savings for our seniors. Over 4 million seniors have signed up so far. Low-income seniors get a $600 credit, as well as the discount on their card. Next year, for the first time, there will be preventative screenings provided for in Medicare. Medicare has never done that before. I mean, it makes sense, doesn't it, to say in Medicare, we want to diagnose problems early, before they become acute, in order to save taxpayers money, and, more importantly, in order to save lives.In 2006, there will be a prescription drug coverage available in Medicare for seniors, with low-income seniors getting substantial help in the payment of -- help in their prescription drugs. In other words, the system is better. Imagine a system where the government would pay a $100,000 hospital stay for heart surgery, but wouldn't pay the medicines necessary to prevent the heart surgery from happening in the first place. We're changing that, for the good of our seniors.We've added community health centers all across the country. These are primary care facilities for low-income Americans to get help. We want people to get help in primary care facilities, not in emergency rooms. It's one way to help hold down costs. We provided health savings accounts, which will be beneficial for people from all walks of life. These are tax free health savings accounts that make sure the patient and the doctor are the center of the decision-making process in health care.I'm concerned about the fact that doctors all across America are leaving the practice of medicine. And one reason they are is because of the frivolous lawsuits that plague the medical profession. I think everybody ought to have their day in court when they've got a legitimate injury, but these frivolous lawsuits are running up the cost of medicine, and they're making medicine harder for people to access. We need tort reform in Washington, D.C., medical liability reform. And I will continue to work so on behalf of the patients and doctors of America.Look, I understand Washington, you understand Washington. There's a powerful group up here in the trial lawyers. I don't think you can be pro-doctor and pro-patient and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. I think you've got to make your choice, and I've made my choice. (Applause.)I believe strongly that the Justice administration ought to enforce the civil rights laws, and we are. I'm the first President to have banned racial profiling in federal law enforcement. I believe that the benches ought to reflect, as best as possible, the diversity of our country. And I believe my administration ought to, too, and I've fulfilled that commitment. I've got people from all walks of life who advise me.My Cabinet is diverse. The people who walk into the Oval Office and say, Mr. President, you're not looking so good today, they're diverse. (Laughter.) And I'm better off for it. I'm better off for listening from people from different walks of life. And our bench will be, too, if we can get people to have a fair hearing on the floor of the United States Senate. They need to stop playing politics with my nominees for the sake of good justice, for the sake of diversity and for the sake of unclogging some of these federal courts that have got loaded dockets, because the Senate won't approve some of my nominees.Finally, I believe a compassionate America is one that taps into the strength of the country. Those are the hearts and souls of our people. I like to remind our citizens, government can hand out money but it cannot put hope in a person's heart. That happens when a loving soul puts their arm around somebody in need, and says, what can I do to help you. That's the whole crux of the faith and community initiative -- faith-based and community initiative that I have worked with Congress on and worked with my administration on to spread compassion in America. Oh, I know there's a big debate here in Washington about separation of church and state, and I accept that debate. And I think it's important. The church should never be the state and the state should never be the church. No question about it.But when we find effective programs that are helping to save people's lives, the government ought to open up federal money to those programs for competitive bidding. We ought not to fear faith-based programs. We ought not to fear those who are willing to love their neighbor just like they'd like to be loved themselves.AUDIENCE MEMBER: (Inaudible.)THE PRESIDENT: Excuse me. Excuse me. I think it's very important for the faith-based initiative to continue on, because I know we can save America one heart, one soul, one conscience at a time. (Applause.)One of the most important initiatives is the drug rehabilitation initiative I've asked Congress to work with me on. Let me tell you how it works. They appropriated $100 million to help those who are hooked on drugs. A lot of times the government counseling program can work. But a lot of times it requires a change of heart in order to change habits. And so, therefore, a person who is desperately seeking help will be able to take a voucher and have that voucher redeemed at a program of his or her choice, faith-based or not. We need to give people who need help the opportunity to interface with those fantastic healers and helpers that literally are saving our country one heart and one soul at a time.I've got a duty as your President to work as hard as I can to secure our country. It's a duty that goes on. September the 11th changed the world. It changed how we must look at our internal security. There is some thinking here in America that says, if you go on the offense against the terrorists, you're creating more terrorists. That is a woeful misunderstanding of the nature of the terrorist threat. (Applause.)These were the people who were training for years to bring harm to freedom-loving people. These were the people who took -- who gained confidence because there was no response when they wantonly killed around the world. These are people who you cannot negotiate with, you cannot bargain with. And these are people that you must not hope for the best. See, they're cold-blooded killers, they will kill you just like that, in order to create fear and intimidation. My most solemn duty is to protect our country. I will continue to do so by hunting these killers down around the world and bringing them to justice before they hurt us here at home. (Applause.) And as we do so, we will continue to spread freedom and peace.I want to tell you a story about an event that took place in the Oval Office. Seven men came to see me, from Iraq. They had had their right hands cut off by Saddam Hussein. You know why? Because his currency had devalued and he needed a scapegoat. In this case, he needed seven scapegoats. I asked one of the fellows who came in to see me, he said -- I said, why you? And he said, well, because he happened to have sold dinars to buy euros, I think he said, to buy gold so he could manufacture the jewelry that he was making. He made this transaction on -- evidently on the wrong date, because the dictator picked him out and said you're one of seven, and I'm cutting off your hand and burning an ""X"" in your forehead. And these were the fellows that came to see me.They came to see me because their story was documented and Marvin Zindler -- I don't know if there are any Houstonians here, but you know Marvin Zindler, he's a -- yes, you know Big Marv. (Applause.) Yes, sir, born and raised in Houston, he knows -- he was brought up by Marvin Zindler. Big 2 News. He flew them over to Houston, and they got new hands. And they were coming to see me in the Oval Office. And it was a very emotional moment for all of us. A guy took a Sharpie, folded it in his new hand, and wrote, ""God bless America,"" in Arabic. You see, he said, ""God bless America"" because he had been liberated from the clutches of a brutal tyrant who whimsically could cut off a hand.The contrast was sharp to me, about the nature of freedom, a free society and a tyrannical society. Free societies are peaceful societies. Free societies help people realize their dream. Free societies are compassionate societies.In the Oval, I told them, I said, you know, I'm glad you're here; it's very important for you to know that a successful President is one who realizes he's not bigger than the office, that the office of President is always bigger than the person, and that as we help you build a free Iraq, the institutions must be bigger than the people, so that never happens to you again.While we pursue the terrorists and protect ourselves, we must also be confident in the ideals of liberty, and how freedom can change societies. You might remember, you cover the news, you might remember a while back where there was some doubt as to whether or not anybody would show up to register to vote in Afghanistan. Expectations were quite low as to how many people would dare take risk to exercise their God-given right. You might remember the incident when the Taliban pulled four women off a bus. They saw that they had voter IDs and killed them. Since that time, millions of people in Afghanistan have registered to vote. I think the total now is over 8 million people are lining up to exercise their right as a citizen to participate in a free society.The long-term solution to the world is to spread freedom and liberty, and America must continue to lead. We're the home of liberty. We believe in freedom. Deep in my soul, I know that freedom is not America's gift to the world, freedom is the almighty God's gift to every man and woman in this world. And I believe the United States of America must lead, must lead the world toward a more peaceful tomorrow by spreading hope and liberty in places that are desperate for freedom.I want to thank you all for giving me a chance to come today. It's my honor to be here. I look forward to answering some questions. I'm off to shake a few hands in New Hampshire. But what the heck, it's the season, isn't it? (Laughter.) God bless you all. (Applause.)Q Thank you very much, Mr. President. We appreciate you being here this morning.THE PRESIDENT: By the way, it's Big 13 News, not Big 2. (Laughter.) Thank you, 11 numbers. (Laughter.) Excuse me.Q A little addition. (Laughter.) Good morning, Mr. President. I'm Julie Chen, with CBS News, and the Asian American Journalist Association. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: You've got quite a following out there.Q It is, after all, the season, isn't it? (Laughter.)I wanted to ask you about protecting all Americans, as well. There are many Arab Americans and Muslims in this country who find themselves unfairly scrutinized by law enforcement and by society at large. Just yesterday we had arrests in Albany, New York. Immediately afterwards, some neighbors in the community said they feared that the law would come for them unfairly next. We have a new book out today that suggests perhaps we should reconsider internment camps. How do we balance the need to pursue and detain some individuals from not well-known communities, while at the same time keeping innocent people from being painted by the broad brush of suspicion?THE PRESIDENT: Yes, I appreciate that. First, we don't need intern camps. I mean, forget it. (Applause.) Right after 9/11, I knew this was going to be an issue in our country, that there would be people that say, there goes a Muslim-looking person, therefore that person might be viewed as a terrorist. I knew that was going to be a problem. That's why I went to a mosque, to send the signal, right after the attacks, that said, let's uphold our values. People are innocent until judged guilty. Religious people, people that go to mosques, you know, need to be -- Americans need to be viewed as equally American as their neighbor, be tolerant; let law enforcement, to the best of their ability, determine guilt or innocence, but our fellow citizens need to treat people with respect.By far, most Americans in this country did that, not because I asked them to, just because by far the vast majority of Americans are decent people. They care about their neighbors. I don't care where you're from or what your walk of life is, by far the vast majority of our citizens are willing to reach out to somebody who is different. And that needed to be done. As a matter of fact, the anecdotal stories of neighbors helping neighbors, across religious lines, were heart warming.Now in terms of the balance between running down intelligence and bringing people to justice obviously is -- we need to be very sensitive on that. Lackawanna, for example, was a -- there was a cell there. And it created a lot of nervousness in the community, because the FBI skillfully ferreted out intelligence that indicated that these people were in communication with terrorist networks. And I thought they handled the case very well, but at the time there was a lot of nervousness. People said, well, I may be next -- but they weren't next, because it was just a focused, targeted investigation. And, by the way, some were then incarcerated and told their stories, and it turned out the intelligence was accurate intelligence.I guess my answer to your question is, is that we've always got to make sure that people are judged innocent before guilty, that's the best insurance policy for law enforcement overstepping its bounds. I will also tell you, however, that the threats we're dealing with are real, and therefore we must do everything we can to ferret out the truth and follow leads.We cannot -- again -- it's interesting, these recent threats, you know, they're becoming more and more enriched, as you're finding out. There was more than one thread line -- threat line. People are now seeing there was other reasons why we took the action we took. When we find out intelligence that is real that threatens people, I believe we have an obligation, as government, to share that with people. And imagine what would happen if we didn't share that information with the people in those buildings, and something were to happen; then what would you write, what would you say?So we have a, in terms of law enforcement, we have a duty to uphold innocence and guilt. In terms of a government, we have the solemn duty to follow every lead we find and share information we have with people that could be harmed. And that's exactly what we've done, and I will continue to do as the President.This is a dangerous time. I wish it wasn't this way. I wish I wasn't the war President. Who in the heck wants to be a war President? I don't. But this is what came our way. And this is our duty, to protect our people. It's a solemn duty, and I'll continue doing it to the best of my ability.Q Good morning. My name is Mark Trahant. I'm the editorial page editor of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer and a member of the Native American Journalist Association. (Applause.) Most school kids learn about the government in the context of city, county, state and federal. And, of course, tribal governments are not part of that at all. Mr. President, you've been a governor and a President, so you have a unique experience, looking at it from two directions. What do you think tribal sovereignty means in the 21st century, and how do we resolve conflicts between tribes and the federal and the state governments?THE PRESIDENT: Tribal sovereignty means that, it's sovereign. You're a -- you've been given sovereignty, and you're viewed as a sovereign entity. And, therefore, the relationship between the federal government and tribes is one between sovereign entities.Now, the federal government has got a responsibility on matters like education and security to help, and health care. And it's a solemn duty. And from this perspective, we must continue to uphold that duty. I think that one of the most promising areas of all is to help with economic development. And that means helping people understand what it means to start a business. That's why the Small Business Administration has increased loans. It means, obviously, encouraging capital flows. But none of that will happen unless the education systems flourish and are strong, and that's why I told you we've spent $1.1 billion in the reconstruction of Native American schools. (Applause.)Q Good morning, Mr. President, thanks for coming. I'm Ray Suarez, a member of the National Association of Hispanic Journalists and -- (applause) -- there's a couple of others here, too -- and senior correspondent for The News Hour with Jim Lehrer, on PBS.THE PRESIDENT: Yes, I recognize you. (Laughter.)Q In one of the most closely watched cases of the 2003 term, the Supreme Court split the difference on affirmative action, allowing Bakke to stand, but rejecting the numerical formulas used by the University of Michigan undergraduate schools. I'd like to hear your own view about when, and if, race and ethnicity are admissible as factors for consideration both in college admissions and in hiring in the workplace. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Yes. I agreed with the Court in saying that we ought to reject quotas. I think quotas are discriminatory by nature. They discriminate -- I think they discriminate on the bottom, and I know they discriminate on the top. And so I agreed with their assessment that a quota system was an unfair system for all.As you might remember, we also agreed with the finding that -- in terms of admissions policy, race-neutral admissions policies ought to be tried. If they don't work, to achieve an objective which is diversification, race ought to be a factor. I agree with that assessment. I think it's very important for all institutions to strive for diversity, and I believe there are ways to do so.When I was the governor of Texas, there was concerns that our big institutions were not -- big educational institutions were not diversified enough. So I went to the legislature and said, why don't we work together and say that there's automatic admission to our universities if you finish in the top 10 percent of your high school class, no matter what high school you go to. And it worked. It worked because the student bodies began to diversify at the University of Texas, and at Texas A&M. And -- that's an inside joke up here. (Laughter.) You're about to hear why.I have a responsibility to work for diversity, as well, in the administration. I've met the obligation. If you look at my administration, it's diverse. And I'm proud of that. Condi Rice is there because she happens to be a very competent, smart, capable woman. She's also African American. And she is my closest foreign policy advisor. I see her every day. When I see Condi, I think, brilliant person. And I'm glad she's there. Colin Powell -- he was here yesterday, evidently. Rod Paige -- Rod Paige was the superintendent of schools in Houston. I wanted somebody who knew what it meant to run a school district, not a theorist; somebody who knows what it means to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations. He had. He's there. Alfonso Jackson, Elaine Chao, Norm Mineta -- Mel Martinez was in my Cabinet. We've got a diverse Cabinet. I've got a diverse administration. Hopefully, that sets an example for people when it comes to hiring, including news organizations. (Applause.)Q Mr. President, Roland Martin.THE PRESIDENT: Tell them what it's about, Martin.Q Oh, I will. Nationally syndicated columnist with Creators Syndicate, and also the editorial consultant for the Chicago Defender, the nation's only daily black newspaper. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Give them what --Q I will. And representing the National Association of Black Journalists -- (applause) -- the world's largest minority media organization. And, the inside joke, a 1991 graduate of Texas A&M University. (Applause.) And, Mr. President, before I ask the question, I hope you'll give our governor, Rick Perry a call. I know you spend a lot of time in D.C., Mr. President, but they're trying to cap the top 10 percent in Texas, so that may have an impact on those students going to college. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Yes, but I appreciate your recognizing that it's working in the first place.Q It is -- but they actually -- the percentage of white students increased, as well. I understand.THE PRESIDENT: See, sometimes --Q I understand.THE PRESIDENT: -- they talk, sometimes they deliver. (Applause.)Q I understand. It's okay. I'm working with the A&M president on that. I also hope that you would take a second round of questions, from Texan-to-Texan, so we can ask a second question. (Applause.) If you would do me that favor.THE PRESIDENT: All right, just ask your two questions.Q Mr. President, you remarked -- in your remarks you said that 8 million people in Afghanistan registered to vote, and as you said, exercised their God-given right to vote.THE PRESIDENT: Right.Q That may be a right from God, but it's not guaranteed in the U.S. Constitution. In 2000, an estimated 2 million people -- half African American -- had their votes discounted, from Florida to Cook County, Illinois to other cities. (Applause.) Come on, that cuts into other questions. Are you going to order Attorney General John Ashcroft to send federal election monitors to Florida and other southern states? And in this age of new constitutional amendments, will you endorse a constitutional amendment guaranteeing every American the right to vote in federal elections? (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: First of all, look, I can understand why African Americans, in particular, are worried about being able to vote, since the vote had been denied for so long in the South, in particular. I understand that. And this administration wants everybody to vote.Now, I -- the best thing we did was to pass the Helping America Vote Act with over -- I think it's $3 billion of help to states and local governments to make sure the voting process is fair. And it's not just the South, by the way. The voting process needs help all over the country to make sure that everybody's vote counts and everybody's vote matter. I understand that. And that's why I was happy to work with the Congress to achieve this important piece of legislation.Just don't focus on Florida. Now, I'll talk to the governor down there to make sure it works. (Laughter.) But it's the whole country that needs -- voter registration files need to be updated, the machines need to work. And that's why there's $3 billion in the budget to help, Roland. And, obviously, everybody ought to have a vote. And what was your other question?Q Should we put it in --THE PRESIDENT: The Constitution amendment?Q Should we guarantee it in the Constitution?THE PRESIDENT: I'll consider it. I'll consider it. And what's your second question?Q Well, but you said it should be guaranteed in Iraq, why not America?THE PRESIDENT: Well, it's not guaranteed in Iraq. People have got to show up to vote in the first place. This is -- the thing about democracy is people need to step up and decide to participate in the first place. There's no guarantees people are going to vote. They should be allowed to vote. But the problem we have in our society is too many people choose not to vote. And we have a duty in the political process -- (applause) -- and you have a duty as journalists to encourage people to register to vote, to do their duty. I'm not saying every -- I'm saying people are choosing. It's not guaranteed they're going to. That's part of the problem we have in America, not enough people do vote. And you have a duty on your radio stations, on your TV stations to encourage people to register to vote. I have a duty to call them out to vote. Of course, I'm going to try to call them out to vote for me. (Laughter.)Second round.Q All right, come back around, sir.Q Early in your administration, you talked a good deal about immigration reforms and possibilities there. I have not heard you talk to that issue so much recently. I wonder what you still think is possible, given the circumstances that we find ourselves in today. What is doable, particularly in the short-term?THE PRESIDENT: Actually, I have talked about it lately. I talked about it this winter, because I think it's necessary that we reform our immigration laws. I believe where there's a willing worker and a willing employer, and they can't find work here in America, the people ought to be allowed to be here legally to work, that's what I believe. And I believe there ought to be a process that allows a person to work here legally, and go home, and come back without fear of being arrested. (Applause.)I think there needs to be a -- first of all, this will help bring people out of the shadows of our society. This will help kind of legalize a system that takes place everyday, without employers feeling like they have got to be subjected, or employees feeling like they're going to be arrested -- subjected to fines or arrested. And so we need to reform our immigration laws.Now, the issue there is whether or not people automatically get to step in the front of the line when it comes to citizenship. I don't think they should. I think those who have been waiting in line to be a citizen ought to be allowed to keep that priority in line. I think people ought to -- in this process ought to be allowed to apply for citizenship, but I don't think they ought to be treated specially, in relation to those who have been in line for quite a while. And in order to solve the logjam for citizenship, Congress has got to raise the quotas on who can become a citizen. And I support raising the quotas on certain population groups, like the Mexican nationals, on who can become a citizen. (Applause.)The long-run solution, particularly to Mexican immigration, is going to be to help Mexico develop a middle class. That's why free trade is so important between our countries. That's why we better be careful about rhetoric that begins to unwind a free trade agreement that is making an enormous difference in the lifestyles of people in Mexico. See, trade, to me, is the great hope for developing nations. That's why I was a strong supporter of AGOA, the African Growth and Opportunity Act. It gives people a chance to have a job that's a meaningful job, because of the trade between the world's largest market and their countries. NAFTA has made a big difference in lifting lives of people. It has improved the living standard in Mexico.Listen, people are coming to the United States to work from Mexico because they want to make a living for their families. And if they can't make a living for their families at home, they'll come here to work. And, therefore, we must work with Mexico to develop a middle class in the long run, so people can do their duty as a parent at home. That's what they want. And we need to change our immigration laws. Will it get done? Probably not this year. This is an election year -- not much gets done, except for a lot of yelling and elbowing. But I would like to see reasonable immigration reform come out of the Congress.Q A few minutes ago you mentioned the -- every American received a tax cut that's working. The most onerous tax for many Americans, particularly on the low end of the scale, is the payroll tax. What can be done about payroll taxes?THE PRESIDENT: Well, obviously, I chose to provide tax relief by income tax cuts, not by payroll taxes, and the reason why is payroll taxes relief will affect the solvency of Social Security. So I chose not to deal with the payroll tax.Q Mr. President, this week, General Tommy Franks, your former CENTCOM commander has been on tour, talking about his book, talking about his Iraqi experience. And he conservatively estimated two to four more years of a large-scale American presence in Iraq. This morning there is fresh fighting in Najaf, Nasiriyah, Samara. What is the mission at this point, for 140,000 American forces? And how will we know when they're done? (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: The mission is for the -- their mission is there to be a democratic Iraq, where they have elections to elect their government. That's the mission, to help them achieve that. And that's important. And that's necessary work. The tactics to achieve that are, one, we help provide security to the Allawi government as they move toward elections. Obviously, there are people there that are still trying to disrupt the election process. They can't stand the thought of a free society in the midst of a part of the world that's just desperate for freedom. These people don't like freedom. You know why? Because it clashes with their ideology. We actually misnamed the war on terror, it ought to be the struggle against ideological extremists who do not believe in free societies who happen to use terror as a weapon to try to shake the conscience of the free world. (Laughter.)No, that's what they do. They use terror to -- and they use it effectively, because we've got good hearts. We're people of conscience, they aren't. They will cut off a person's head like that, and not even care about it. That's why I tell you, you can't talk sense to them. Maybe some think you can, I don't. I don't think you can negotiate with them. Let me --Q That two to four year projections --THE PRESIDENT: No, let me finish. Let me finish, please, sir. Thank you, though.We will stay there until the job is completed and our commanders on the ground tell us. See, I think it's very important for those of us in the political arena to listen to the commanders on the ground. Tommy was a great commander on the ground, I listened to him. And now I'll listen to General Casey as to -- and Ambassador Negroponte as to when they think we've achieved our mission.The second stage, by the way, Ray -- he's trying to get me to put a timetable out there. I'm not going to do it, see. And when the timetable is busted, they'll say, I told you. (Laughter.) Anyway --Q We've got to try. (Laughter.)THE PRESIDENT: Yes, ""A"" for effort.It's still dangerous there, no question about it. The dynamics have changed, however, because Prime Minister Allawi is now in charge of the interim government. He's a tough, strong guy who believes that Iraq can be free and democratic. And that's an important step. It was -- he's willing to step up and say clearly to the Iraqi people, let's reject this violence and terrorism that is threatening a better way of life. He's the fellow who woke up in bed one night in London to confront an axe-wielding thug -- thugs from Saddam Hussein that tried to hatchet him to pieces, axe him to pieces. And so he's seen firsthand what tyranny can do, and he's made a decision, obviously, to take risk on behalf of a free society.The key to success, to answer your question about when, is how quickly the Iraqis are trained and prepared to take action, themselves. The ultimate success of our venture in Iraq, which is a free and democratic country, will depend upon how quickly we can help the Iraqis defend themselves. The will is there, and now they must have the training and equipment to provide them what is necessary to do their duty in a free society.One of the biggest fears many Iraqi citizens have is that we're not a country of our word, people don't want to take risks. They understand that at this point in time, if a vacuum were created, anarchy would reign, and there would be mayhem and bloodshed. And they're fearful that the United States will once again say something and not mean it. I say ""once again,"" because you might remember at different times during Iraqi history they were -- they believed they heard something, in terms of U.S. support, and it didn't happen. And then there was a lot of death as a result of unfulfilled expectations. We've got to stay with them until they achieve the objective.Nice try.Q Mr. President, you say, ""Quotas are an unfair system for all,"" with regards to your opposition to affirmative action.THE PRESIDENT: No, no, no, whoa, whoa. With regard to my opposition to quota systems.Q To quotas, okay. But I've never heard you speak against legacy. (Applause.) Now, the President of Texas A&M, Robert Gates, said that he would not use race in admissions, and then he later said he would not use legacy. If you say it's a matter of merit, and not race, shouldn't colleges also get rid of legacy? Because that's not based upon merit, that's based upon if my daddy or my granddaddy went to my college. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Yes. I thought you were referring to my legacy. (Laughter.)Q That's why I allowed you to go ahead and bring it out. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Well, in my case, I had to knock on a lot of doors to follow the old man's footsteps. (Laughter.) No, look, if what you're saying is, is there going to be special treatment for people -- in other words, we're going to have a special exception for certain people in a system that's supposed to be fair, I agree, I don't think there ought to be.Q So the colleges should get rid of legacy.THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think so, yes. I think it ought to be based upon merit. And I think it also ought to be based upon -- (applause) -- and I think colleges need to work hard for diversity. Don't get me wrong. Don't get me wrong. You said, against affirmative action, is what you said. You put words in my mouth. What I am for is --Q I just read the speech, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: What speech?Q In terms of when you came out against the Michigan affirmative action policy, and --THE PRESIDENT: No, I said was against quotas.Q So you support affirmative action, but not quotas.THE PRESIDENT: I support colleges affirmatively taking action to get more minorities in their school. (Applause.)Q That's a long headline, Mr. President. (Laughter and applause.)THE PRESIDENT: I support diversity, I don't support quotas. I think quotas are wrong. I think quotas are wrong for people, and so do a lot of people.Q Just to be clear. You believe that colleges should not use legacy.THE PRESIDENT: I think colleges ought to use merit in order for people to get in, and I think they ought to use a merit system like the one I put out.Q Thank you very much.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you all. Thanks for having me. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"  Thank you all so very much for coming. Thanks for having me. (Applause.) It's great to be back here in the Quad Cities area; it's a great place to work and raise your family; it's what I would call the heart and soul of the country. (Applause.) We have a little difference of opinion about the heart and soul -- some of them think  you can find it in Hollywood.THE AUDIENCE: No!THE PRESIDENT: I think you find it right here in Davenport, Iowa. (Applause.)I'm looking forward to the race. I'm here to ask for your vote and ask for your help. (Applause.) Everywhere we're going, the crowds are big, the enthusiasm is high, the signs are good -- with your help, Dick Cheney and I will have four more years. (Applause.)I regret -- I regret that Laura is not here to see this significant crowd. (Applause.) She is a fabulous First Lady. (Applause.) She is a great mother and a wonderful wife. Today I'm going to give you some reasons for you to put me back in office, but perhaps the most important reason of all is so that Laura will be the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)I'm proud to be running with Dick Cheney. I admit, he's not the prettiest one on the ticket. (Laughter.) I didn't pick him for his looks. (Laughter.) I picked him for his judgment and his experience. Dick Cheney is a great Vice President. (Applause.)I want to thank my friend, Jim Nussle. I appreciate his leadership in the United States Congress. He's the budget man. He's looking out after your money. He and I understand when we spend money in Washington, it's not the government's money, it's the people's money. (Applause.)I appreciate my friend, Jim Leach joining us today. What a fine, fine citizen of the state of Iowa. (Applause.) I want to thank my friend, Tom Latham, for joining us, the congressman from the other part of the state. Thanks for inviting him here to eastern Iowa. (Applause.) It's good for your congressmen to get a taste for the decency of the folks that live in this part of the state. (Applause.)I want to thank Chuck Gipp, David Vaudt, all the state officials here. I appreciate the mayor coming. Mr. Mayor, we're proud you're here. (Applause.) Fill the potholes. (Laughter.)I want to thank Mayor Freemire, of Bettendorf, as well; I'm proud you're here. I want to thank my friend, David Roederer, who is campaign chairman for this great state of Iowa. I appreciate my friend, Larry Gatlin -- we were both raised in west Texas together, I was in Midland, he was in Odessa. I can't sing, he can. (Laughter and applause.)Listen, I want to thank all the grassroots activists who are here. I appreciate you coming. I want to thank you for what you are going to do -- which is to register the voters. We have a duty in this country to vote. Make sure you register people. Don't worry about what party they're in; we want everybody voting in America. (Applause.) However, now when you're convincing them who to vote for, don't overlook discerning Democrats and wise independents. (Laughter.) When you get them headed toward the poll, nudge them our way. I'm counting on your help, and together we're going to win not only Iowa, but it's going to be a great victory in November nationwide. (Applause.) We were close in Iowa last time. Not this time, we're going to carry it. (Applause.)Every incumbent who's asking for the vote has to answer a question: Why? Why should the American people give me the great privilege of serving as your President for four more years? In the past years we've been through a lot together. We've been through a whole lot together. And we've accomplished a great deal. But there's only one reason to look backward at the record, and that is to determine who best to lead our nation forward.I'm asking for your vote because so much is at stake. We have more to do. We must work to move America forward. I want to be your President for four more years to make our country safer. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!`THE PRESIDENT: I want to be your President for four more years to make our economy stronger. I want to be your President for four more years to make our future brighter and better for every one of our citizens. (Applause.) From creating jobs to improving schools, from fighting terror to spreading the peace, we have made much progress and there is still more to do. (Applause.)We have more to do to make our public schools the centers of excellence we know that they can be, so that no child is left behind in this country. When we came to office three-and-a-half years ago, too many children were being shuffled from grade to grade, year after year, without learning the basics. So we've challenged the soft bigotry of low expectations. We've raised the bar. (Applause.) We believe in accountability. We believe in making sure local folks are in charge of public schools. We believe in empowering parents. And, today, children across America are showing real progress in reading and math. When it comes to improving America's public schools, we're turning the corner, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)Listen, we've got more to do. The world we're in is changing. The jobs of the future will require greater knowledge and a higher level skills. So we've got to reform our high schools to make sure a high school diploma means something. We're going to expand math and science so young people can compete in our high tech world. We will expand the use of the Internet to bring high level training into classrooms. With four more years, we will help a rising generation gain the skills and confidence they need to realize the American Dream. (Applause.)We have more to do to make quality health care available and affordable. When we came to office, too many older Americans could not afford prescription drugs -- and Medicare didn't pay for them. Leaders in both political parties for years had promised prescription drug coverage for our seniors -- we got it done. (Applause.) Already, more than 4 million seniors have signed up for drug discount cards that provide real savings. Beginning in 2006, all seniors on Medicare will be able to choose a plan that suits their needs and gives them coverage for prescription drugs.I remember campaigning with Nussle and Leach and Latham, and your fine United States senator, Charles Grassley. (Applause.) I said, we're going to strengthen Medicare to make sure rural hospitals in Iowa get the help they need. So we provided more funds to hospitals healing -- handling a low volume of patients. We've increased payments for ambulance providers and suppliers in rural areas. We're giving better bonuses to physicians, so we can keep good doctors practicing in rural America. In other words, we delivered on our promise to the people of Iowa. (Applause.) The other folks talk a good game -- we deliver. (Applause.)To help people get access to quality care, we've expanded community health centers for low income Americans. We've created health savings accounts, so families can save, tax-free, for their own health care needs. When it comes to giving Americans more choices about their health care and making health care more affordable, we're moving America forward and we're not going to turn back. (Applause.)This world is changing. Most Americans get their health care coverage through their work. Most of today's new jobs are created by small businesses, which too often cannot afford to provide health coverage. To help more American families get health insurance, we must allow small employers to join together to purchase insurance at the discounts available to big companies. (Applause.)To improve health care, we must end the frivolous lawsuits that raise health care costs and drive doctors out of medicine. (Applause.) You cannot be pro-patient and pro-doctor and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. (Laughter.) I made my choice: I will continue to work with Congress to pass medical liability reform for the patients of America. (Applause.)We can do more to harness technology to reduce costs and prevent health care mistakes. We can do more to expand research and seek new cures for terrible diseases. And in all we do to improve health care in America, we'll make sure the health decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)We have more to do to make our economy stronger. Listen, we've come through a recession and terror attacks and corporate scandals and a stock market decline. We overcame these obstacles because of the hard work of Iowa's small business people, because we've got the best workers in the world. We've overcome these obstacles because we've got the best farmers in the world. (Applause.)And we've overcome these obstacles because of well-timed tax relief for the American people. Listen, we didn't pick winners and losers when it came to tax relief. We gave tax relief to every American who pays federal income taxes. (Applause.) We gave tax relief for families with children. We gave tax relief for married couples. (Applause.) What kind of tax code is it that penalizes marriage? It's a tax code that needs to be changed. (Applause.) We gave tax relief for every small business that purchases equipment. And this time, the check really was in the mail. (Applause.)Because we acted, our economy since last summer has grown at a rate as fast as any in nearly 20 years. Because we acted, America has added more than 1.5 million new jobs since last August. (Applause.) Because we acted, Iowa has added more than 11,000 jobs over the past year. Because we acted, Iowa's unemployment rate now is 4.3 percent. (Applause.) When it comes to creating jobs for American workers, we are turning the corner and we're not going back. (Applause.)We worked to strengthen our farmers and ranchers. We passed a good Farm Bill, I was proud to sign it. We phased out the death tax, so America's family farmers [sic] can stay in the family. (Applause.) We've opened up foreign markets for Iowa and Illinois farmers. You see, if you're good at something, you ought to have the opportunity to sell that which you're good at around the world. (Applause.)Listen, this country needs an energy strategy. We must become less dependent on foreign sources of energy if we want to keep jobs here in America. (Applause.) And one way to become -- one way to become less dependent on foreign sources of energy is to promote alternate sources of fuel, like biodiesel and ethanol. (Applause.) I told the people of this state when I was running in 2000, I support ethanol. I have kept my promise to Iowa's farmers. (Applause.) In the last three years, America's farmers have posted record net-cash, farm income -- record. Record exports. Record farm equity and land values. I have made the success of America's farmers and ranchers a priority, and America is better off for it. (Applause.)To keep jobs in America, regulations need to be reasonable and fair. To keep jobs in America, we must end the junk lawsuits which threaten our small businesses. (Applause.) To keep jobs in America, we will not overspend your money, and we will keep your taxes low. (Applause.) To keep jobs in America, we will offer a workers a lifetime of learning, and to make sure they get training for the jobs of the future at our community colleges. The education and training community colleges offer can be the bridge between people's lives as they are, and people's lives as they want them to be.And we're going to make sure America's families keep more of something they never have enough of, and that is time -- time to be with your kids, time to take care of your parents, time to go to class to improve yourselves. Congress needs to work with the administration to enact comp-time and flex-time to help America's families better juggle their home needs and their work needs. (Applause.)What I'm telling you is, after four more years, the economy will be better. More small business owners will be in America. Better and higher paying jobs will exist here. And our farmers will be able to put something aside for the future generations. (Applause.)We have more to do to wage and win the war against terror. America's future depends on our willingness to lead in this world. If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This is not going to happen on my watch. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: The world changed on a terrible September morning, and since that day, we have changed the world. Before September the 11th, Afghanistan served as the home base for al Qaeda, which trained and deployed thousands of killers to set up terror cells in dozens of countries, including our own. Today, Afghanistan is a rising democracy. Afghanistan is a place where many young girls now go to school for the first time. (Applause.) Afghanistan is an ally in the war against terror, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists. America and the world are safer. (Applause.)In Saudi Arabia, before September the 11th, terrorists were raising money and recruiting and operating with little opposition. Today, the Saudi government is taking the fight to al Qaeda. America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Today, because America and our allies have sent a strong and clear message, the leader of Libya has abandoned his pursuit of weapons of mass destruction, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, the ruler of Iraq was a sworn enemy of America. He was defying the world. He was firing weapons at American pilots, enforcing the world's sanctions. He had pursued and used weapons of mass destruction -- (applause) -- against his own people. He had harbored terrorists. He invaded his neighbors. He subsidized families of suicide bombers. He had murdered tens of thousands of his own citizens. He was a source of great instability in a volatile part of the world. After September the 11th, we looked at all the threats in a new light. One of the lessons of September the 11th, is this country must take threats seriously before they fully materialize. (Applause.)The September the 11th Commission concluded that our institutions of government had failed to imagine the horror of that day. After September the 11th, we could not fail to imagine that a brutal tyrant who hated America, had ties to terror, had used weapons of mass destruction might use those weapons or share his deadly capabilities with our enemies. (Applause.) We saw a threat. The United States Congress, members of both political parties -- including my opponent -- looked at the same intelligence and saw a threat to America. The United Nations looked at the same intelligence, and it saw a threat and unanimously demanded a full accounting of Saddam Hussein's weapons and weapons programs, or face serious consequences. That's what the free world demanded. After 12 years of defiance, the tyrant refused to comply. He continued to deceive the world. He deceived the weapons inspectors that the world had sent into Iraq. Now, I had a choice to make: Do I forget the lessons of September the 11th and trust a madman?THE AUDIENCE: No!THE PRESIDENT: Or do I take action to defend America? Given that choice, I will defend our country. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Because the dictator sits in a prison cell, the people of Iraq are better off. America and the world are safer. (Applause.)When it comes to fighting the threats of our world, when it comes to making America safer, when it comes to spreading peace, we're moving forward, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)We've got more to do. I'm running for four more years because we've got more to do. (Applause.) We must continue to work with our friends and allies around the world to aggressively pursue the terrorists in Iraq and Afghanistan and elsewhere. See, you can't talk sense to the terrorists.THE AUDIENCE: No!THE PRESIDENT: You cannot negotiate with them.THE AUDIENCE: No!THE PRESIDENT: You cannot hope for the best. We must engage the enemies around the world so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.) America will continue to lead the world with confidence and moral clarity. (Applause.) We put together a strong coalition to help us defeat terror, and that's necessary. Over 60 nations are involved with the proliferation security initiative. Nearly 40 nations are involved in Afghanistan. Some 30 nations are involved in Iraq. We will continue to build our alliances. We will continue to work with our friends for the cause of security and peace. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)We will keep our commitment to help Afghanistan and Iraq become peaceful, democratic societies. These two nations are now governed by strong leaders, people who want the boys and girls of their respective countries to grow up in peace. They know what we know in America: moms and dads long for a peaceful society; they long for their children to be able to be educated and realize their dreams. The people of these countries are stepping up, providing security for their own people. After years of brutality they see a glimmer of hope, a chance to live in a free society. And these people can count on our help and the help of our coalition.You see, when we acted to protect our own security, we also promised to help deliver them from tyranny, to restore their sovereignty, to help set them on the path to liberty. And when America gives its word, America will keep its word. (Applause.)In these crucial times, our commitments are kept by the men and women of our military. At bases across our country and the world, I've had the privilege of meeting with those who defend our country and sacrifice for our security. I've seen their great decency and their unselfish courage. The cause of freedom is in really good hands. (Applause.) And our men and women in uniform deserve the full support of our government. (Applause.) Last September, while our troops were in combat in both Afghanistan and Iraq, I proposed supplemental funding to support our military and its mission. This legislation provided funding for body armor and vital equipment, hazard pay, health benefits, ammunition, fuel and spare parts for our military. In the Senate, only a small, out-of-the-mainstream minority of 12 voted against the legislation. Two of those 12 senators are my opponent and his running mate.THE AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Here's how my opponent tried to explain his vote. He said: I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it. (Laughter.) End quote. (Laughter.) Then he went on to say that he was proud that he and his running mate voted against it and he further said: The whole thing is a complicated matter.There is nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)In the long run, our security is not guaranteed by force, alone. We must work to change the conditions that give rise to terror: poverty and hopelessness and resentment. A free and peaceful Iraq, and a free and peaceful Afghanistan will be a powerful example to their neighbors in a part of the world that is desperate for freedom. (Applause.)Free countries do not export terror. Free countries listen to the dreams and aspirations of their citizens. By serving the ideal of liberty, we're bringing hope to others, and that makes America more secure. By serving the ideal of liberty, we're making the world a more peaceful place. By serving the ideal of liberty, we serve the deepest ideals of our country. Freedom is not America's gift to the world; freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)We have more to do to protect us. Enemies who hate us are still plotting to harm us. Those who claim that America's war on terror is to blame for terror threats against the United States have a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of the enemy. See, the 9/11 Commission said something wise: Our homeland is safer, but we are not yet safe.Beginning immediately after September the 11th, we started the hard process of reform. We transformed our defenses. We've created a new Department of Homeland Security. We passed the Patriot Act to give law enforcement the tools they need to help make America more secure. (Applause.) The mission of the FBI is now focused on preventing terror. We're integrating intelligence and law enforcement better than we ever have before. We've taken action on a large majority of the Commission's recommendations. We have more to do to better secure our ports and borders, to train first responders, to dramatically improve our intelligence gathering capability. That's why this week I called on Congress to create a position of National Intelligence Director, so that one person is in charge of coordinating all our intelligence efforts, overseas and here at home.These reforms are not going to be easy. I understand that. You see, reform is never easy in Washington. (Laughter.) There's a lot of entrenched interests there. People don't like to have the status quo challenged. It's not enough, though, to advocate reform, you have to be able to get it done. (Applause.)And we're getting it done on behalf of the people of this country. When it comes to reforming schools to provide an excellent education for all our children, results matter. When it comes to health care reforms that give families more access and more choices, results matter. When it comes to improving our economy, and creating quality jobs, results matter. When it comes to a strong farm economy, results matter. When it comes to better securing our homeland, fighting the forces of terror, and promoting the peace, results matter. When it comes to electing a President, results matter. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: No, there's a lot of big talkers in the nation's capital. We just like to be known as the people who can get the job done. (Applause.) We're living in a time of great change. And it's an exciting time -- it really is -- to be an American. We got to make sure government responds to these times by standing side-by-side with people, side-by-side with our workers and side-by-side with our families. The best way to do so, in my judgment, is to encourage people to own something; to encourage people to own their own homes. Listen, the home ownership in America is at an all-time high, and that's good news for our country. (Applause.)We want our workers to be able to own their own health care accounts so they can take them from job to job. We want younger workers to be able to own a Social Security personal retirement account that they can call their own and pass on from one generation to the next. (Applause.)We want people owning their own farm and their own small business. See, we understand when you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of this country. The world is -- times have changed, but some things are not going to change. Our belief in liberty will not change. Our belief in the non-negotiable demands of human dignity will not change. Our desire to make sure opportunity, the great American experience is spread throughout every corner of this country, will not change. The individual values we try to live by won't change: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. The institutions that give us direction and purpose are important: our families, our schools, our religious congregation. They are so important and so fundamental, they deserve the respect of government. (Applause.)We stand for things. We stand for something. We stand for institutions, like marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every person counts. (Applause.) We stand for judges who faithfully interpret the law, instead of legislating from the bench.And we stand for a culture of responsibility in America. This culture of ours is changing from one that has said, if it feels good, do it, and, if you've got a problem, blame somebody else -- to a culture in which each of us understands we're responsible for the decisions we make in life. (Applause.) If you're fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you are responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.) If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you are responsible for doing something about it. (Applause.) If you are a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.)And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourselves. Listen, the strength of this country is not our military; the strength of this country is not our wallets -- the strength of this country is the heart and soul of the American people. (Applause.)I want to be your President for four more years so we can continue to rally the armies of compassion, so we can help change America one heart, one soul, one conscience at a time. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation, when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. It's a time that requires strength and firm resolve. This is a time that requires courage and our willingness to lead.AUDIENCE MEMBER: That's why we love you! (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: None of us will ever forget that era -- that week when one era ended and another one began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I will never forget. There were workers in hard hats yelling at me: Whatever it takes. A guy grabbed me by the arm, he had tears in his eyes, he was exhausted from searching through the rubble to find his friend. He said: Do not let me down. He took it personally. The people searching through the rubble took that day personally. You took it personally and so did I. (Applause.)I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect our people. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: No, we've come through much together. We've done hard work. During the next four years we will spread ownership and opportunity all throughout our land. We'll pass the enduring values of our country to another generation. And during the next four years we'll continue to lead in the cause of freedom, so the world will be a more peaceful place. (Applause.)You know, four years ago I traveled your great state asking for the vote, and I made a pledge that if you honored me with this great responsibility I would uphold the dignity and the honor of the office to which I had been elected, so help me, God. (Applause.) And with your help, I will do so during the next four years. May God bless you. Thanks for coming. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"  Thanks for the warm welcome. Welcome to Texas. (Applause.) And thanks for inviting me so I can come home. (Laughter.) I really appreciate the Knights of Columbus. This strong organization believes in families and faith, and compassion for those in need. And I'm honored you'd invite me to the 122nd Convocation of this great  organization.I appreciate Carl Anderson, and his leadership. I've gotten to know Carl because, you see, he's more than just an introducer of Presidents. (Laughter.) He's a person who works with Presidents -- at least this President. And I'm proud to have his help. (Applause.)It's good to see my family friend, Virgil Dechant. Virgil, it's good to see you, sir. Thank you for such a warm greeting in the photo op line and reminding me of some great days gone past. I'm proud to be here with Cardinal McCarrick. It's good to see you, sir. He's a neighbor in my temporary residence. (Laughter.) I appreciate Cardinal Egan. I appreciate Cardinal Rigali, of the great city of Philadelphia; Cardinal Francis George of Chicago; Cardinal Keeler of Baltimore, Maryland. I'm honored you all are here. Thank you for your presence.I'm honored to be in the presence of Cardinal Macharski, the Archbishop of Krakow, who succeeded the Holy Father in that role. Welcome to the United States. Appreciate you coming, sir.I appreciate Bishop Wilton Gregory's leadership, of the Conference of Catholic Bishops. I appreciate Your Eminences, and Your Excellencies, Reverends, Monsignors, Fathers and Deacons. Nuestros amigos de Mexico. I appreciate the officers and directors, state deputies, board of directors, delegates, ladies and gentlemen, Knights, and my fellow American. Thanks for having me. (Applause.)Two months ago, I had the privilege of visiting His Holy Father Pope John Paul II at the Vatican. It was my third meeting with His Holy Father since I took office, and for those of you who have ever met him, you know I'm telling you the truth when I tell you being in his presence is an awesome experience. He is a true presence. On the occasion, I had the special honor of presenting him with America's highest civil award, the Presidential Medal of Freedom. It was my chance to express our nation's respect for a devoted servant of God and a true hero of our time.Pope John Paul II has been a unique and commanding voice for the cause of the poor, the weak, the hungry, and the outcast. He has challenged our nation, and the entire world, to embrace the culture of life. He's called upon us to uphold and affirm the dignity of every person, rich and poor, able and disabled, born and unborn. He's called us to love and serve our neighbors in need. Few organizations have worked harder and done more and met this challenge than the Knights of Columbus. (Applause.) I know you're proud of your organization, and you should be.The Knights were born in New Haven, Connecticut. Come to think of it, so was I. (Laughter and applause.) From your foundations in a small church basement, you have raised up one of the great America organizations dedicated to charity and mutual assistance and the fight for civil liberties.I'm proud to say that my family has contributed to your ranks. A few years ago, Governor Jeb -- (applause) -- became a Knight. (Applause.) And he -- yes -- and he recently took his Third Degree. (Applause.) I'll see him this weekend. His son is getting married. I'll pass on the word, aim for the Fourth. (Laughter and applause.) Jeb knows, as I do, that your works of mercy are making our society more compassionate, changing the lives of millions of citizens. Compassionate work changes our society one heart and one soul at a time.Last year, the Knights raised and donated a record $130 million to charity. That's a phenomenal record. (Applause.) You also volunteered for an unprecedented 61 million hours of community service. (Applause.) You obviously have heard the call.I was pleased to hear this story about the Knights in Corpus Christi, Texas, at the Mother Teresa Day Shelter. They're a daily presence there -- they're mopping the floors, collecting laundry soap, blankets, and food for 130 homeless men and women. They're not giving the orders, they're serving the people. Patricia Henry, the shelter director, put it this way: ""If I need help, I just give the Knights a call."" (Applause.) Such a powerful example. Americans across this great land know that they can do the same, that they can serve our country by helping someone in need.We're grateful for your service to the men and women in uniform and to our nation's veterans. You've sent hundreds of thousands of prayer books to those working to make our country more secure and to bring freedom in parts of the world that are desperate for freedom. You bring comfort and strength to our soldiers, sailors, airmen, and Marines. I want to thank you for taking time to visit our wounded and disabled veterans, for providing comfort to their families, to give them a word of thanks.See, you're -- the Knights are soldiers in the armies of compassion. You're foot soldiers. You've heard the call. You're helping this nation build a culture of life in which the sick are comforted, the aged are honored, the immigrant is welcomed, and the weak and vulnerable are never overlooked. (Applause.) You have a friend in this administration. You have somebody who wants to work with you to change America for the better.We have a responsibility in government to do things to help overcome recession and corporate scandal. It's easier to be a hopeful society when people are working. That's why I put forth an economic stimulus plan to encourage small business growth, a plan that will help get jobs moving, so people can work and do their duty as a mom or a dad and put food on the table. And we're making progress.When I came to Washington, I was concerned about a school system that simply shuffled children through grade after grade, year after year, and hoped for the best. Oftentimes, what we found out was kids with great hearts were graduating from schools, but couldn't read. I challenged the soft bigotry of low expectations by raising the bar, insisting on high standards, by making sure the money we spent -- and we did spend more money -- went to help those who needed extra help early, before it was too late. I believe you've got to measure in order to know. If you believe a child can read, you've got to measure to determine whether or not that child is reading, and if not, get them help early, before it's too late. (Applause.)Because we measure, we know that now more minority children are learning to read at grade level, and that's good for America. I want to thank the Knights -- (applause) -- I want to thank the Knights for their help in helping low-income parents in Washington, D.C. escape from schools -- have their children escape from schools that will not teach and will not change. Because of the work of the Knights of Columbus, and other concerned citizens in our Nation's Capital, poor parents now have a choice. They'll have a $7,500 scholarship so they can afford to send their school -- their child to a private school or parochial school, their choice to make. (Applause.)You know, one of the great statistics of this modern era is the fact that more people are owning their own home. It seems like to me, an optimistic society is one that encourages ownership, more people owning their own business, people owning and managing their own health care account, people being -- own a piece of their retirement policy that they can pass on from one generation to the next, and people owning their own home. I love a society in which more and more people are able to say, welcome to my home; come to my home. (Applause.)This country has added more than 1.6 million minority homeowners in the past two years. Today, the American homeownership rate is the highest ever, and the highest ever for minorities. When you own something you have a vital stake in the future of your country. (Applause.)I want to work with the Knights for reasonable and compassionate immigration reform, to bring good, hardworking people out of the shadows of American life, and to ensure that America is always a welcoming nation. I recognize, like you recognize, that amidst the great prosperity of America, amongst our great wealth, there are pockets of despair in this country, and we've got to do something about it. We must address despair so America is hopeful for every single person.See, we got fellow citizens who are trapped in the misery of drugs and gang violence and the collapse of the family. Our society and our government have a responsibility -- you have a responsibility, those of us honored to hold high office have a responsibility. We're doing some practical things. We've got a community-wide effort to help educate kids to the dangers of using drugs. We believe in collaborative efforts; people all throughout society must work to reduce the demand for drugs. Listen, we'll do all we can to bust the thugs, interdict the drugs coming in from foreign -- overseas. But we've got to work on demand. And teen use of drugs is down by 11 percent from 2001 to 2003. That's a hopeful sign. A hopeful America is where our children are learning -- (applause.)There's a lot of work to be done on health care, but one place I know we can continue to work together on is health care for the poorest of the poor. We've expanded and built over 600 community health centers in America. I want to double the number, so the 16 million poor Americans can get primary health care without putting a strain on the emergency rooms of our hospitals, whether they be public or private.We've got to pay for -- we've got to work on additional welfare reforms to help people find a job, help them have the skills necessary to work, so they realize the dignity that comes from being independent from government, and at the same time, strengthen marriage and the family as part of welfare reforms. (Applause.)But I believe one of the most effective ways our government can help those in need is to help the charities and community groups that are doing God's work every day. That's what I believe government ought to do. I believe government needs to stand on the side of faith-based groups, not against faith-based groups, when they come to saving lives. (Applause.)Government can hand out money, and of course, there will be arguments whether we're handing out enough or not. But what government can never do is put love in a person's heart, or a sense of purpose in a person's life. You see, in order to heal -- help the lonely, it works every time when a loving soul puts their arm around and says, what can I do to help you; how can I help you in your life; what can I do to make your life better. Many are called by God to do so, and government must stand on the side of those millions of acts of mercy and kindness that take place on a daily basis.And so the faith-based initiative that I've launched recognizes the need there be separation of church and state -- the state should never be the church, and the church certainly should never be the state. But the state should never fear the good works of the church. (Applause.) And the truth of the matter is, there's a culture inside government which resents and fears religious charities, and has discriminated against them. We're changing that. I want to thank the Knights for their help in changing that attitude in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)Our goal is to end the unfair discrimination against faith-based charities by the federal government. And we're making substantial progress. In December 2002, I issued an executive order -- I was hoping, frankly, that Congress would pass a law. I got tired of waiting. (Laughter.) I got tired of the process debate. See, I'm focused on results. I want there to be positive results. I want lives to be saved, as best as possible. The process bogged down. For those of you who pay attention to Washington, you know what I'm talking about when I say the process bogs down.So I signed an executive order, mandating equal treatment for faith-based charities in the federal grant-making process. What that means is that faith-based groups ought to be allowed to apply for federal grants just like everybody else should be allowed to apply. (Applause.) Faith-based groups will not be allowed to discriminate against who they serve, and they won't use the federal money to proselytize. But they're allowed to use the money to change hearts and souls, to help save lives, to embetter the world we live in.And so here's the principle we've established: Religious charities that are effectively helping the poor should have a fair and equal chance to compete for federal money. That's the new -- those are the new rules. And this -- in 2003, discretionary grants to faith-based programs was over a billion dollars. We're making progress. We're using federal taxpayers' money for effective use in helping to save lives. We're providing a social network of loving -- helping loving souls interface with people so they can realize a better tomorrow.Three years ago I established the Compassion Capital Fund. It's an innovative idea. It was a -- the fund gives money to intermediary organizations that provide faith-based and community organizations with training, technical assistance -- what it is, is like a little incubator. If you want to access federal money, here's how you do it. If you want to start up a faith-based program, here's some of the lessons learned. In other words, what we're trying to say is not only are we going to allow those faith-based programs that already exist to access federal money, we want to help others spring up and understand the pitfalls to succeed.The fund provides grants to faith-based and community organizations, as well, to help them fund their programs for the poor and the hungry and the homeless. We've awarded $56 million under this program. Today I release another $43 million to the compassionate federal grant program.We're moving forward on another initiative which is mentoring for the children of prisoners. I mean, if the job of government is to try to set priorities, a priority is to help children of prisoners find love. Imagine what a tough life it is for a young boy or girl to go see his or her mom or dad behind prison bars. These are children who need help. They're vulnerable to gains and crime and despair. They're desperate for responsible adults in their life who can give them what many of them long for, which is love and tenderness.The best way to do that is to encourage all groups, including faith-based groups, to provide mentors. And it's happening in America. For those of you who are mentoring the children of prisoners, thank you for what you're doing to make America a more welcoming place. (Applause.) We've awarded grants -- today we've unleashed another $45.5 million of grants to programs, all aimed at doing this.I'll tell you another program that's important is to help the addict, is to help the person so stuck on drugs that they can't realize the great human potential that God has given them, and they need desperate help. I believe that some counseling programs work, no question about it. But I also know programs that change the heart work. When a person changes their heart, they change their habits. Government is not good at changing hearts. The Almighty God is good at changing hearts -- (applause) -- which happens to be the cornerstone of effective faith-based programs. And therefore, when it comes to spending federal money to help addicts, I've asked the Congress, and the Congress has agreed to allow us to use vouchers to go to the person who is seeking help. That person can use that voucher at any kind of program he or she chooses, including faith-based programs to help heal hearts and save lives.In other words, some of these are the ways that -- (applause) -- what I'm telling you is, things are changing in the Nation's Capital when it comes to invigorating the faith-based initiative, and the Knights have helped a lot. I appreciate your efforts to level the playing field when it comes to grant-making. And because of your efforts, America is changing for the better.I needed someone to lead this program, so guess who I turned to? The Knights. (Applause.) I found Towey. Jim Towey is the Director of the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. He's with me. You know what his job is? His job is to help the faith community -- by the way, all faiths, all faiths -- Christian, Jew, or Muslim -- all faiths understand what is possible now. His job is also to make sure the federal government is a hospitable place for faith programs to work with. Let's be frank about it. Many faith-based programs don't want to interface with government. You know why? They're afraid of losing the ability to practice their faith. How can you be a faith-based program if you're not allowed to practice your faith?Towey's job -- (applause) -- so Towey has got a big job, it's to change a culture, a suspicious culture, and we're making progress. A suspicious culture in Washington, a suspicious culture in the grassroots. Here's Towey's story. He goes to meet Mother Teresa for the first time. He shows up at one of her homes for the dying in India, and the sister who greeted him assumed he was there to work. (Laughter.) That's what I assume every day that Towey shows up. (Laughter.) So she gave Jim some cloth, and said, go clean the sores of a dying man. He says it changed his life, that experience. He went on to work full-time for the Missionaries of Charity. Incredibly enough, Jim Towey, Director of the Office of Faith-Based Initiatives in the White House, was Mother Teresa's lawyer. I ask you, what kind of society is it where Mother Teresa needs a lawyer? (Laughter and applause.) It's a society that needs tort reform. (Laughter and applause.)I appreciate your good work, friend. Thanks for coming today.The Knights of Columbus are transferring lives with works of compassion, and, just as importantly, you're defending the values of faith and family that bind us as a nation. I appreciate your fight to protect children from obscenity. I appreciate your working to protect the Pledge of Allegiance, to keep us ""one nation under God."" (Applause.) I want to thank you -- I want to thank you for the defense of the traditional family. That is a most fundamental institution for our society. I appreciate the fact you're promoting the culture of life. (Applause.)We're making progress here in America. Last November, I signed a law to end the brutal practice of partial-birth abortion. (Applause.) This law is constitutional; this law is compassionate; this law is urgently needed; and my administration will vigorously defend it in the courts. (Applause.)I was pleased to sign the Born Alive Infants Protection Act. I want to thank the Knights on that piece of legislation. (Applause.) I signed the Unborn Victims of Violence Act. Common sense and conscience tells us that when an expectant mother is killed, two lives are ended, and the criminal should answer for both crimes. (Applause.)I was pleased to sign legislation supporting maternity group homes. We'll continue to work to help crisis pregnancy centers. We'll work together to strengthen incentives for adoption and parental notification laws. The Knights have been helpful -- (applause) -- the Knights have been helpful and I appreciate your help.My 2005 budget, I proposed to more than triple federal funds for abstinence programs in schools and community-based programs above 2001 levels. (Applause.) I'll continue to work with Congress to pass a comprehensive and effective ban on human cloning. (Applause.) Human life is a creation of God, not a commodity to be exploited by man. (Applause.)I look forward to working with the Knights to defend the sacred bond of marriage. (Applause.) A few activist judges have taken it upon themselves to redefine the institution of marriage by court order. I support a constitutional amendment to protect the sanctity of marriage by ensuring it is always recognized as the union of a man and woman as husband and wife. (Applause.) I appreciate the Knights' stand on this issue.I also appreciate the Knights' of Columbus stand on the federal judiciary. I have a responsibility as President to make sure the federal judicial system runs well. I have nominated superb men and women for the federal -- for the federal benches who will strictly and fully interpret the law, not legislate from the bench. (Applause.)In all these areas, caring for the poor, and protecting the vulnerable, affirming life, and defending the family, we're depending on the goodness and compassion of the American people. And that's good, because the American people are good and compassionate. See, the strength of this country is not our military might, it's not the size of our wallet. The strength of this country is the hearts and souls of the American people. (Applause.) And it is an incredible honor to be the President of such a nation, a President of a nation of compassion and decency and honor, and such powerful values that we're able to bring people from all walks of life under the rubric of being an American.I appreciate the prayers of the people of this country. People I'll never get to say thanks to in person lift Laura and me up in prayer. It's a remarkable aspect of the presidency. More significantly, it's a remarkable aspect of the life of the United States of America. I'm grateful for your prayers; I'm grateful for your great service and the example you set for our country.Thanks for having me today. May God bless your organization, and may God continue to bless our great country. Thank you. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"   Thank you, all. I appreciate you coming. Sit down if you've got a chair. (Applause.) I'm proud you're here; thanks for inviting me. (Applause.) You can't come to Grand Rapids and not think about a great President, Gerald Ford. (Applause.) What a decent man. What an honorable citizen. And what a great example for  Presidents. (Applause.)I appreciate you coming out for our Heart and Soul of America tour. This is going to be a great campaign; I'm looking forward to it. And there is going to be big differences. We'll have differences over taxes, how to keep the peace. And there seems to be a difference over the heart and soul of America. My opponents think you can find it in Hollywood. I think you find it right here in Grand Rapids, Michigan. (Applause.)I'm excited about traveling the country. I was in Springfield, Missouri earlier. I'm going to Cleveland, Ohio; Canton, Ohio; on to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania tomorrow. I like traveling. I like being with people. The crowds are big. The enthusiasm is high. And with your help, Dick Cheney and I will serve this nation for four more years. (Applause.)Speaking about my friend, Dick Cheney, I admit, he's not the prettiest face in the race. (Laughter.) But I picked him because he's steady and strong and reliable. He's got good judgment. Dick Cheney is a great Vice President. (Applause.)And speaking about really fine people, I am sorry that Laura is not here.THE AUDIENCE: Awww!THE PRESIDENT: I know. (Laughter.) Most people feel that way. They wish she were speaking and I stayed at home. (Laughter.) But I'm really proud of her. She is a great lady, a fantastic First Lady. (Applause.) I'm going to give you some reasons why I think you need to put me back in office, but perhaps the most important reason of all is so that Laura will be First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)I want to thank Juan Olivariz, for his leadership of this very important institution. I appreciate a fellow Tejano serving the community of Grand Rapids -- that means a fellow Texan. (Laughter.) I appreciate his warm words of introduction. Gracias, amigo. (Applause.)I appreciate Hoekstra -- Peter Hoekstra for his service in the United States Congress. I'm proud to call him friend. (Applause.) And I appreciate my friend Vern Ehlers' service to the people of Michigan in the United States Congress, as well. (Applause.) I'm honored that Terri Lynn Land, and Mike Cox, and Ken Sikkema are with us today. I've gotten to know these good souls during my trips here in Michigan. And they represent the state well. I appreciate Speaker Rick Johnson joining us, as well; State Senator Bill Hardiman. I'm honored that these good citizens have decided to serve the people of the communities in the great state of Michigan. I thank them for the hard work they have done and are going to do to make sure we carry the state of Michigan this time. (Applause.)I want to thank my friend Betsy DeVos, and Chuck Yob, and Holly Hughes, and the ambassador, Peter Secchia. (Applause.) I want to -- does it strike anybody funny, Ambassador Secchia? No? (Laughter.) We love him in our family.I want to thank all the grassroots activists who are here. I appreciate your willingness to work in the political process. I encourage you to get people to register to vote. Make sure people go to vote on Election Day. We have a duty in our society -- in our democratic system, we have a duty to participate. And I want to thank you for getting people to participate. And when you get them headed into the polls, give them a little nudge our way. (Laughter and applause.)Every incumbent who asks for the vote has got to answer one central question, and that's: Why. Why should the American people give me the privilege -- the high privilege of serving as your President -- for four more years. In the past few years we've been through a lot together, and we have accomplished a great deal. (Applause.) But there's only one reason to look backward at the record, and that is to determine who will lead the nation forward, who can do the job for the American people. I'm asking for your vote because so much is at stake. We have much more to do to move this country forward. (Applause.)I want to be your President for four more years to make our country safer, to make our economy stronger, to make the future better and brighter for every single citizen who lives in this ct. (Applause.) From creating jobs to improving schools, from fighting terror to protecting our homeland, we've made much progress, and I'm here to tell you, we have got more to do. (Applause.)We have more to do to make America's public schools the centers of excellence we know they can be so that no child is left behind in this country. When we came to office three-and-a- half years ago, too many children were being shuffled from grade to grade, year after year, without learning the basics. So we've challenged the soft bigotry of low expectations. We're setting high standards. We're focusing on results. We're insisting on accountability. We're empowering parents. And we're making sure local folks are in charge of their own public schools. And today, children across America are showing real progress in reading and math. When it comes to improving America's public schools, we are turning the corner and we are not turning back. (Applause.)We have more to do. This world of ours is changing. Jobs of the future will require greater knowledge and higher skill levels. We must reform our high schools to make sure a high school diploma means something. (Applause.) We will expand math and science education so young people can compete in a high-tech world. We will expand the use of the Internet to bring high-level training into classrooms. With four more years, we will help a rising generation gain the skills and confidence to achieve the American Dream. (Applause.)We have more to do to make quality health care available and affordable. When we came to office, too many older Americans could not afford prescription drugs, and Medicare didn't pay for them. Leaders in both political parties had promised prescription drug coverage for years. We got it done. (Applause.) Already, more than 4 million seniors have signed up for drug discount cards that provide real savings. And beginning in 2006, all seniors on Medicare will be able to choose a plan that suits their needs and gives them coverage for prescription drugs.We've expanded community health centers for low income Americans. We've created health savings accounts so families can save tax-free for their own health care needs. (Applause.) When it comes to giving Americans more choices about their own health care and making health care more affordable, we are turning the corner and we're not turning back. (Applause.)Most Americans get their health coverage through their work. But today's new jobs are created by small businesses, which too often cannot afford to provide health coverage. To help more American families get health insurance, we must allow small employers to join together to purchase insurance at the discounts available to big corporations. (Applause.)To improve health care, we must limit the frivolous lawsuits that raise health care costs and drive doctors out of medicine. (Applause.) We will do more to harness technology to reduce costs and prevent health care mistakes. We will do more to expand research and seek new cures for terrible diseases. And in all we do to improve health care in America, we will make sure that health decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)We have more to do to make America's economy stronger. We've come through a lot together. We've come through a recession and terrorist attacks and corporate scandals. We overcame these obstacles, because the hard work of the American people, because the entrepreneurial spirit is strong, because people like our farmers and ranchers refuse to buckle. We overcame these obstacles, as well, because of two well-timed tax cuts. (Applause.) We didn't -- when we provided tax relief, we didn't try to pick winners or losers. We didn't play politics. We did it the fair way. We provided tax relief to every American who pays taxes. (Applause.) For families with children, for married couples, for small businesses -- and this time, the check was really in the mail. (Applause.)Because we acted, our economy since last summer has grown at a rate as fast as any in nearly 20 years. (Applause.) Because we acted, America has added more than 1.5 million new jobs since last August. (Applause.) We still face serious challenges -- especially in places like western Michigan, where the slow-down hit hard. I understand that. That's why I'm going to keep working to help all sectors of our economy recover. We will not rest until every American who wants to work can find a job. (Applause.)The cornerstone of our tax relief plan was help for small businesses. Most new jobs in America are created by entrepreneurs in small businesses. Today, I met Bob Roth again. He runs a manufacturing company. He told me that business in this part of the country is turning around, that people are beginning to add jobs. As a matter of fact, his small business hired nine workers in the past year. He tells me the reason why is because he is confident about what tax relief means. He says, we'll take fair advantage of any relief that is possible; it helps us feel more confident about investing. The small business sector of the country is leading the growth for new jobs in America. (Applause.)We can do more to make America more job friendly and America's workplaces more family friendly. To keep American jobs in America, regulations must be minimal, reasonable and fair. To keep American jobs here, we must lessen our dependence on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.) To keep American jobs here, we must end the junk lawsuits that hurt small businesses. (Applause.) To keep American jobs in America, we will not overspend your money, and we will keep your taxes low. (Applause.)I met Audra and Brian van Haren. They're here today. These good folks saved about $2,500 on their taxes in 2003 and they're going to save another $2,500 on their taxes in 2004. That's what the tax relief provided. It's their own money to begin with, by the way. (Applause.) It's not like -- we're not passing the government's out. (Applause.) These people worked hard for that money. They can spend it better than the government can spend their money. (Applause.) Some of the tax relief is set to expire, which means they'll have to pay $1,100 more in taxes next year. Now is not the time to be raising taxes on the working people of this country. (Applause.)Over the next four years, we'll offer American workers a lifetime of learning and help them get training for the jobs of the future at places like our community colleges. (Applause.) The education and training community colleges offer can be the bridge between people's lives as they are, and people's lives as they want them to be.Today, I met Sarah Soles. She used to work as a part-time receptionist at a doc's office. She went back to a community college program. She's now a nurse. She makes more money at steady employment because she found time to get more training, and to get a new degree. The community college system of America is vital in making sure America is a competitive place in the world. (Applause.)To make sure we continue to grow our economy and people can find work, we will insist on a level playing field when it comes to trade. This country can compete with anybody, any time, anywhere with free and fair trade. (Applause.) And we will help American families keep more of something they never have enough of, and that's time -- time to play with the kids, time to go to the little league game, time to take care of their parents, or to go to class to improve themselves. I believe that Congress must enact comp-time and flex-time to help America's families better juggle the demands of work and home. (Applause.)After four more years, our nation will have more small businesses. The entrepreneurial spirit will be strong. There will be greater opportunity, and better and higher wages for the American workers. (Applause.)We have more to do to wage and win the war against terror. America's future depends on our willingness to lead in the world. If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: The world changed on a terrible September morning. And since that day, we have changed the world. Before September the 11th, Afghanistan served as the home base of al Qaeda, which trained and deployed thousands of killers to set up terrorist cells in dozens of countries, including our own. Today, Afghanistan is a rising democracy, an ally in the war on terror, a place where many young girls now go to school for the first time, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists. They're an ally in the war on terror, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, in Saudi Arabia, terrorists were raising money and recruiting and operating with little opposition. Today, the Saudi government has taken the fight to al Qaeda, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Today, because America and our allies have sent a strong and clear message, the leader of Libya has abandoned his pursuit of weapons of mass destruction and America and the world are safer for it. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, the rule of Iraq was a sworn enemy of America. He was defying the world. He was firing weapons at American pilots who were enforcing the world's sanctions. He had pursued and used weapons of mass destruction against his own people. He harbored terrorists. He invaded his neighbors. He subsidized the families of suicide bombers. He murdered tens of thousands of his own citizens. He was a source of great instability in the world's most volatile region. He was a threat.After September the 11th, we had to look at threats in a new light. The lesson of September the 11th was we must take threats seriously before they fully materialize. (Applause.)The September the 11th Commission concluded that our institutions of government had failed to imagine the horror of that day. After September the 11th, we could not fail to imagine that a brutal tyrant who hated America, had ties to terror, had used weapons of mass destruction might use those weapons or share his deadly capabilities with the terrorists. We saw a threat. We looked at the intelligence and saw a threat. The United States Congress, members of both political parties -- including my opponent -- looked at the intelligence and they saw a threat. (Applause.)The United Nations looked at the intelligence and it saw a threat and unanimously demanded a full accounting of Saddam Hussein's weapons programs or he will face serious consequences. After 12 years of defiance, he again refused to comply. When he continued to deceive the weapons inspectors, I had a decision to make: forget the lessons of September the 11th and trust a madman, or defend the United States of America. Given that choice, I will defend our country every time. (Applause.)Saddam Hussein sits in a prison cell. America and the world are safer. (Applause.)When it comes to fighting the threats of our world and spreading peace, we're turning the corner and we're not turning back. (Applause.) We have more to do. We will continue to work with friends and allies around the world to aggressively pursue the terrorist enemy and the foreign fighters in Iraq and Afghanistan and elsewhere. See, you can't talk sense to them. You cannot negotiate with the terrorists. They're cold-blooded killers. We must engage the enemy so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)We will continue to lead the world with confidence and moral clarity. We put together a strong coalition to help us defeat terror. There are nearly 40 nations involved in Afghanistan, some 30 nations involved in Iraq. I'll continue to build alliances and work with our friends for the cause of security and peace, but I will never turn America's national security decisions over to leaders of other nations. (Applause.)We will keep our commitments to help Afghanistan and Iraq become peaceful democratic societies. These two nations are now governed by strong leaders, people committed to freedom. People in Afghanistan and Iraq are stepping up for their own security. They're willing to step up and to fight those who want to stop the advance of a free society. You know why? Because they want their children to grow up in a peaceful world. (Applause.) Moms and dads in Iraq and Afghanistan have great hopes for their children. They want them to be educated. They want them to realize their dreams. The people of those countries, the freedom-lovers in those two countries can count on continued help from America and our coalition.You see, when we acted to protect our own security, we promised to help deliver them from tyranny, to restore their sovereignty, and to set them on the path to liberty. And when America gives its word, America keeps its word. (Applause.)In these crucial times, America's commitments are kept by the men and women of our military. At bases across the country and the world, I've had the privilege of meeting with those who defend our country and sacrifice for our security. I've seen their great decency and their unselfish courage. Ladies and gentlemen, the cause of freedom is in really good hands. (Applause.)And we must make sure they have the full support of the federal government. And that's why last September while our troops were in combat in Afghanistan and Iraq, I proposed supplemental funding to support our military in their missions. The legislation provided funding for body armor, and vital equipment, for hazard pay, for health benefits, ammunition, fuel, and spare parts. In the Senate, only a very small -- what I would call out of the mainstream minority of 12 Senators voted against the legislation. Two of those 12 senators are my opponent and his running mate. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Senator Kerry tried to explain his vote by saying this, ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it."" (Laughter.) End quote. (Laughter.) He's had different explanations since then. He said that he was proud that he and his running mate voted against the funding, then he further said: the whole thing is a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There's nothing ""complicated"" about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)In the long run, our security is not guaranteed by force, alone. We will work to change the conditions that give rise to terror: poverty and hopelessness and resentment. A free and peaceful Iraq, a free and peaceful Afghanistan will be powerful examples in a neighborhood that is desperate for freedom. (Applause.) Free countries do not export terror. Free countries are peaceful countries. Free countries do not stifle the dreams of their citizens by serving the ideal of liberty. We're bringing hope to others and that makes America more secure. By serving the ideal of liberty, we're living out the ideals of this country. America knows that freedom is not our gift to the world, freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)We are turning the corner toward a more peaceful world that we long for, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)We have more to do to protect our country. Enemies who hate us are still plotting to harm us; this is still a dangerous time. I agree with the conclusion of the September the 11th Commission, our homeland is safer, but we're not yet safe. We've started the hard process of reform. We've transformed our defenses, we're creating a new Department -- we have created a new Department of Homeland Security. We passed the Patriot Act, to give law enforcement tools needed to track and bring terrorists to justice. (Applause.) The mission of the FBI is now focused on preventing terrorism. We've integrated intelligence and law enforcement better than we ever have before. When it comes to better protecting America, we're turning the corner, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)There's more to do to better secure our ports and borders, to train first responders to dramatically improve our intelligence gathering capabilities. Reform won't be easy; it never is in Washington. See, achieving it requires taking on the entrenched interests in challenging the status quo. It's not enough to advocate reform -- you have to be able to get it done --AUDIENCE MEMBER: Right! (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: -- because when it comes to reforming schools to provide an excellent education for all our children, results matter. When it comes to health care reforms to give families more access and more choices, results matter. When it comes to improving our economy and creating quality jobs, results matter. When it comes to better securing the homeland and fighting the forces of terror, results matter. When it comes to choosing a President, results matter. (Applause.)This week, members of the other political party gathered in Boston. There was a lot of clever speeches, and some big promises. Listen, my opponent has got good intentions, but intentions don't always translate to results. After 19 years in the U.S. Senate, my opponent has thousands of votes, but few signature achievements. During eight years on the Senate Intelligence Committee, he voted to cut the intelligence budget. Yet, he had no record of reforming America's intelligence gathering capability. He's had no significant record for reforming education or health care. In fact, he and his running mate consistently opposed reforms that limit the power of Washington, reforms that would leave more power in the hands of the people.My opponent has spent 20 years in the federal government, and it appears he's concluded it's not big enough. (Laughter.) He's proposed more than $2 trillion of additional spending, and we're just getting started. The problem is, he hasn't told us how he plans to pay for it. But you know how. You can I can guess. It's an educated guess. After all, he's had a history of voting to raise taxes. But we're going to make it clear to him that raising taxes to fulfill all his big promises will be the wrong medicine for America's improving economy. (Applause.)We have a difference of opinion. They share the old Washington mind set: They will give the orders, and you will pay the bills. But we're turned a corner, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)This is a time of amazing change. It's an exciting period of time. In our parents' generation moms usually stayed at home while fathers worked for one company until retirement. The company provided health care and training and a pension. Many of our government programs and most basic systems -- from health care, to Social Security, to the tax code -- were set up based on those old assumptions.Yet, our world today is different. Workers change jobs and careers frequently. Oftentimes, both parents work. Many times there's a single mom struggling to get ahead. Most new jobs are created by the small businesses that cannot afford to provide health care, or pension or training. It is time to make the government work for America's families. America's workers need their own health accounts that they can carry with them from job to job. (Applause.) American workers need pensions and retirement plans that they own, that they control, that they can pass from one generation to the next. (Applause.)These reforms that make sure Americans stand on the side of families and workers are based on this basic conviction: The role of government is not to control or dominate the lives of our citizens; the role of government is to help our citizens gain the time and tools to make their own choices and improve their own lives. (Applause.)And that's why I'm working to usher in a new era of ownership and opportunity in America. We want more people owning their own homes. We want more people owning their own small business. We want more people owning a piece of their retirement plans. We want people owning and managing their own health care accounts. When people own something, they have a vital stake in the future of this great land. (Applause.)Our belief in liberty and opportunity and the non-negotiable demands of human dignity are things that will never change in a rapidly changing world. In this changing world there are just some things that will not change: The values we try to live by -- courage and compassion and reverence and integrity; the institutions that give us direction and purpose -- our families, and our schools, and our religious congregations. These values and institutions are fundamental to our lives and to our future. And they deserve the respect of government. (Applause.)We stand for institutions like marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters, and every person counts. (Applause.) We stand for judges who faithfully interpret the law, instead of legislating from the bench. (Applause.)We stand for a culture of responsibility in America. Our culture is changing from one that has said, if it feels good do it, and, if you got a problem, blame somebody else, to a culture in which each of us understands we're responsible for the decisions we make in life. (Applause.) If you're a mom or a dad, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.) If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. (Applause.) If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.) And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor, just like we'd like to be loved ourselves. (Applause.)The strength of this country is not our government. The strength of this country is the heart and souls of the American people. That's the true strength of America. (Applause.)Today, I had the honor of saying hello to Dr. Peggy Curry. She's the executive director of Grand Rapids Reach. The reason I bring her up is one of the most important initiatives over the next four years will be continue to expand the faith-based program, to have government stand on the side of faith programs, not against faith programs. (Applause.)Dr. Curry's program distributes food to senior citizens. It mentors. There's after-school programs. There's Christian outreach. See, it's a program that understands that when you help a person change their heart, you can help change their lives. (Applause.) For those of you who are soldiers in the army of compassion here in Grand Rapids and western Michigan, thank you for your service. Thank you for helping change America one heart, one soul at a time. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. These aren't one of those times. This is a period where we need resolve, firm resolve and clear vision. None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day that I will never forget. There were workers in hard hats yelling at me, ""Whatever it takes."" I remember a guy grabbing my arm, a firefighter or policeman, I don't know which one, he had tears in his eyes and he looked at me and said, ""Do not let me down."" (Applause.)As we all did that day, these men and women searching through the rubble took it personally. I took it personally. I have a responsibility that goes on. I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect our country. I will never relent in bringing justice to our enemies, whatever it takes. (Applause.)We have come through much together. We've done a lot of hard work together. We're turning the corner. We're moving America forward by extending freedom and peace around the world, and we're moving our country forward by expanding opportunity to every corner of this great land.During the next four years, we will spread ownership and opportunity so every single citizen has a shot at realizing the great dream of this fantastic country. (Applause.) We will pass the enduring values of our country to another generation. We will prevail. With your support and your prayers, I will be a leader America can count on in a time of great change. (Applause.)Four years ago, as I traveled this great country and came to places like Grand Rapids, Michigan, asking for the vote, I made a pledge to my fellow Americans, that if you honored me with this great responsibility, I would uphold the dignity and the honor of the office to which I had been elected, so help me, God. (Applause.) And with your help, I will do so for four more years.Thank you all. God bless you all. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"   Thank you, all.THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Thank you all very much. Thank you, please be seated. Thanks for coming. (Applause.) It's great to be in the heartland of our country. (Applause.) And I want to thank you all for being here this morning to help kick off our Heart and Soul of America Tour. (Applause.)There will be big differences in this campaign. They're going to raise your taxes, we're not. (Applause.) I have a clear vision on how to win the war on terror and bring peace to the world. (Applause.) They somehow believe the heart and soul of America can be found in Hollywood.THE AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: The heart and soul of America is found right here in Springfield, Missouri. (Applause.)I'm looking forward to the campaign. I'm looking forward to getting out amongst the people. We're going to Michigan and Ohio this weekend. Everywhere I've been going the crowds are big, the enthusiasm is high, the signs are good -- with your help, Dick Cheney and I will lead this nation for four more years. (Applause.)I'm sorry Laura is not here -- I know you are, too. (Laughter.) You probably wish she was speaking, and not me. (Laughter.) She is a great First Lady. (Applause.) Today you'll hear some reasons why I think you need to put me back into office. But perhaps the most important reason of all is so that Laura will be First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)I appreciate my running mate. I tell you, he's not the prettiest man in the race -- (laughter) -- but he's got sound judgment -- (applause) -- and he's got great national -- he's got great experience in national security. He's a steady man. I'm proud to have him by my side for four more years. (Applause.)I thank my friend, Roy Blunt, for his leadership and for his great introduction. I'm proud to be working with you. (Applause.) I appreciate my friend, Kit Bond. You need to send him back to Washington, D.C. (Applause.) And two years ago, you sent a good one from Missouri in Jim Talent. I appreciate you, Senator. Thank you for being here. (Applause.)I'm honored that Kenny Hulshof and Jo Ann Emerson are with us, two fine members of the House of Representatives. Thank you all for coming. Proud you're here. (Applause.) Speaker Catherine Hannaway, it's good to see you again. It wasn't just but yesterday, it seemed like, we were in St. Charles, Missouri together. Thank you for coming. I appreciate your warm introduction there. (Applause.)Can't help but notice my friend Johnny Morris is here. Gosh, I wish we were fishing. (Laughter.) I was in the Bass Tracker, I want you to know, over the weekend in Crawford. It didn't sink. (Laughter.) Great to see you, friend. Thanks for coming.I'm proud so many citizens showed up here. I appreciate the grassroots activists who are here. I'm here to ask for your help. I'm not only traveling the country to ask for the vote, I'm here to ask for your help. I'd like you to call up people on the phone and encourage them to register to vote. Encourage them to do their duty on election day to vote. And when you get them headed toward the polls, make sure you nudge them toward that George Bush/Dick Cheney lever. (Applause.)I'm glad Joe White is here. He runs Kanakut Camps. Thanks for coming, Joe, I appreciate you coming. (Applause.) I met a fellow named Charlie Graas. He's a volunteer with the Stone County Food Pantry. Let me tell you why I mention him. The strength of America is in the hearts and souls of our citizens, people who are willing to feed the hungry, provide shelter for the homeless, love a neighbor in need. Charlie, thank you for being an army -- a soldier in the army of compassion. (Applause.)Every incumbent who asks for the vote has to answer one question: Why? Why should the American people give me the great privilege of serving as your President for four more years? In the past few years, we've been through a lot together. We've accomplished a great deal. But there's only one reason to look backward at the record, and that is determine who best will lead the nation forward. (Applause.) I'm asking for your vote because so much is at stake: prosperity and peace. We have so much more to do to move this country forward. Give me four more years, and America will continue to march toward peace and better prosperity. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: I'm asking for four more years to make our country safer, to make the economy stronger, to make our future better and brighter for every, single citizen. From creating jobs to improving schools; from fighting terror to protecting our homeland, we have made much progress, and there is more to do. (Applause.)We have more to do to make America's public schools the centers of excellence we all know they can be, so that no child is left behind in America. When we came to office three-and-a-half years ago, too many of our children were being shuffled from grade to grade, year after year, without learning the basics. We're challenging the soft bigotry of low expectations. We've raised the bar. We're setting high standards. We're focusing on results. We're insisting on accountability. We're empowering parents. We're making sure local folks are in charge of schools. And, today, children across America are showing real, substantial progress in reading and math. (Applause.) When it comes to improving America's public schools, we are turning the corner and we're not turning back. (Applause.)This world of ours is changing. The jobs of the future will require greater knowledge and higher level skills. We'll reform our high schools to make sure a high school diploma means something. We will expand math and science education so our young people can compete in a high tech world. We will expand the use of the Internet to bring high-level training into our classrooms. With four more years, we'll help a rising generation gain the skills and the confidence to achieve the American Dream. (Applause.)We have more to do to make quality health care available and affordable. When we came to office, too many older Americans could not afford prescription drugs. Medicare didn't pay for them. Leaders in both political parties had promised political -- had promised prescription drug coverage for years. We got it done. (Applause.) More than 4 million seniors have signed up for drug discount cards that provide real savings. And beginning in 2006, all seniors on Medicare will be able to choose a plan that suits their needs and gives them coverage for prescription drugs.We've expanded community health centers for low income Americans. We've created health savings accounts so families can save, tax-free, for their own health care needs. When it comes to giving Americans more choices about their own health care and making health care more affordable, we are turning the corner and we're not turning back. (Applause.)This world of ours is changing. Most Americans get their health care coverage through their work. Most of today's new jobs are created by small businesses, which too often cannot afford to provide health coverage. To help more American families get health insurance, we must allow small employers to join together to purchase insurance at discounts available to big companies. (Applause.)To improve health care we must limit the frivolous lawsuits that raise the cost of health care and drive good doctors out of medicine. (Applause.) We must harness technology to reduce costs and prevent deadly health care mistakes. We must do more to expand research and development for new cures for terrible diseases.In all we do to improve health care in America, we will make sure the health decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)We have more to do to make America's economy stronger. We've come through a recession, terrorist attacks, corporate scandals. We overcame these obstacles because of the hard work and will of the American entrepreneur, the small business owner, the farmers and the workers. And we came through these obstacles because of well-timed tax cuts. (Applause.)We gave tax relief to every American who paid taxes. We didn't play favorites with the tax code, we didn't try to pick winners or losers. We made sure families with children, and married couples and small businesses got tax relief. (Applause.) And this time the check really was in the mail. (Laughter and applause.)Because we acted, our economy since last summer has grown at a rate as fast as any in nearly 20 years. (Applause.) Because we acted, America has added more than 1.5 million new jobs since last August. (Applause.) Because we acted, Missouri has added more than 82,000 jobs over the past 11 months; your unemployment rate is now 5.2 percent. (Applause.) When it comes to creating jobs for America's workers, we are turning the corner and we are not turning back. (Applause.)Today, I met a fellow named Kit Carson. He's a small business owner here in Springfield. The most new jobs in America are created by small business owners. That's why the cornerstone of our tax relief plan says we're going to help the small business owners. (Applause.)Here's what he said about tax relief. This is a fellow who's hiring people right here in this area; this is a fellow who's making investments. He said the effect is already -- is showing already. It's going to get better. I'm an optimistic guy, he says; I think we might see a boom bigger than the 90's. The tax relief we passed is working. (Applause.)We will do more to make America more job friendly and America's workplaces more family friendly. To keep American jobs in America, regulations should be reasonable and fair. To keep the jobs here at home, we must lessen our dependence on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.) To keep American jobs here, we must end the junk lawsuits that hurt our small businesses. (Applause.) And to keep this economy growing so people can find work, we will not overspend your money, and we will keep your taxes low. (Applause.)We'll offer America's workers a lifetime of learning, and help them get training for jobs of the future at places like our community colleges. The education and training they offered can bridge -- can be the bridge between people's lives as they are, and people's lives as they want them to be.Today, I met Kristin Heydt. She's from Springfield, as well. She used to be a bank teller. With the tax relief she and her family had as a result of the tax cuts, she went back to school. She's now a nurse. She completed a program. She now makes three times the amount of money she made before, because of education. (Applause.)Good education means workers can realize their dreams. To make sure we continue to grow our economy, we will insist on a level playing field when it comes to trade. We want Missouri farmers selling Missouri crops all over the world. (Applause.) And we'll make sure American families keep more of something they never have enough of, and that's time -- time to play with the kids, time to go to the little league games, time to care for elderly parents, or time to go to class themselves. I believe Congress ought to enact comp-time and flex-time to help America's families better juggle the demands of work and their home. (Applause.)The goals of the economic agenda are clear. After four more years, our nation will have more small businesses, greater opportunities, better jobs, and higher wages for the American people. (Applause.)We have more to do to wage and win the war against terror. America's future depends on our willingness to lead in the world. If America shows uncertainty and weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.) The world -- the world changed on a terrible September morning. And since that day, we changed the world.Before September the 11th, Afghanistan served as the home base for al Qaeda, which trained and deployed thousands of killers and set up terror cells in dozens of countries, including our own. Today, Afghanistan is a rising democracy, an ally in the war on terror, a place where many young girls go to school for the first time. And as a result of our actions, America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.) Before September the 11th, in Saudi Arabia, terrorists were raising money and recruiting and operating with little opposition. Today, the Saudi government has taken the fight to al Qaeda, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.) Before September the 11th, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction.Today, because America and our allies have sent a strong and clear massage, the leader of Libya has abandoned his pursuit of weapons of mass destruction and America and the world are safer. (Applause.) Before September the 11th, the ruler of Iraq was a sworn enemy of America. He was defying the world. He was firing weapons at American pilots and forcing the world to sanctions. He has pursued and used weapons of mass destruction against his own people. He had harbored terrorists, he invaded his neighbors, he subsidized the families of suicide bombers. He had murdered tens of thousands of his own citizens. He was a source of great instability in the world's most vulnerable region.I took those threats seriously. After September the 11th, we had to look at the threat in a new light. One of the lessons of September the 11th is we must deal with threats before they fully materialize. (Applause.)The September the 11th Commission concluded that our institutions of government had failed to imagine the horror of that day. After September the 11th, we cannot fail to imagine that a brutal tyrant who hated America, who had ties to terror, had used weapons of mass destruction and might use those weapons or share his deadly capability with terrorists was not a threat.We looked at the intelligence; we saw a threat. Members of the United States Congress from both political parties, including my opponent, looked at the intelligence and they saw a threat. (Applause.) We went to the United Nations, which unanimously demanded a full accounting of Saddam Hussein's weapons programs, or face serious consequences. After 12 years of defiance, he refused to comply with the demands of the free world. When he continued to deceive the weapons inspectors, I had a decision to make: to hope for the best and to trust the word of a madman and a tyrant, or remember the lessons of September the 11th and defend our country. Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)When it comes to fighting the threats of our world and making America safer and promoting the peace, we're turning the corner and we're not turning back. (Applause.) We have more to do. We will continue to work with our friends and allies around the world to aggressively pursue the terrorists and foreign fighters in places like Iraq and Afghanistan and elsewhere. See, you can't talk sense to the terrorists. You can't hope for the best. You can't negotiate with them. We will engage those enemies around the world so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)We will continue to lead the world with confidence and moral clarity. We've put together a strong coalition to help us defeat the terrorist threats. Over 40 nations are involved in Afghanistan, some 30 nations are involved in Iraq. Over the next four years, I will continue to work with our friends and build alliances. But I will never turn over America's national security decision to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)We will keep our commitment to help Afghanistan and Iraq become peaceful, democratic societies. These two nations are now governed by strong leaders. They're on the path to free elections. More and more people in Afghanistan and Iraq are stepping up to secure their own country from these killers. They understand the benefits of a free society. Moms and dads in Afghanistan and Iraq want their children to grow up in a peaceful world, and so do we. (Applause.)The people of these countries can count on our continued help. When we acted to protect our own security, we promised to help deliver them from tyranny, to restore their sovereignty, to set them on the path of liberty. And when America gives its word, America will keep its word. (Applause.)In these crucial times, our commitments have been kept by the men and women of our military. (Applause.) I thank those who are here today who wear our uniform, and I thank their families, as well. (Applause.) I've seen their great decency and the unselfish courage of those who wear our uniform. The cause of freedom is in good hands. And when these good folks are in harm's way, they deserve the best pay, the best equipment, the best possible training. (Applause.)That's why last September, when our troops were in combat in both Afghanistan and Iraq, I proposed supplemental funding to support them in their missions. The legislation provided for body armor and vital equipment, hazard pay, health benefits, ammunition, fuel, spare parts. In the Senate, only a handful of what I would call ""out of the mainstream"" folks -- that would be 12 senators -- voted against that legislation. Two of the 12 are my opponent and his running mate. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He tried to explain his vote by saying: I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it. (Laughter.) End quote. He's got a different explanation now. One time he said he was proud he voted against the funding, then he said the whole thing was a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There is nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)In the long run, our security is not guaranteed by force, alone. We must work to change the conditions that give rise to terror: poverty and hopelessness and resentment. You see, a free and peaceful Iraq and a free and peaceful Afghanistan will be powerful examples to a neighborhood that needs the example of liberty. Free countries do not export terror. Free countries do not stifle the dreams of their citizens. By serving the ideal of liberty, we're bringing hope to others, and that makes America more secure. By being resolute and strong, by working for the ideal of liberty -- after four more years, America will be more secure and the world will be more peaceful. (Applause.)These are still dangerous times. There's an enemy out there that would like to hurt us and change our way of life and shake our will and shake our confidence. I agree with the conclusion of the September 11th Commission when they said our homeland is safer, but we are not yet safe. We've started the hard process of reform. We've transformed our defenses and created a new Department of Homeland Security. We passed the Patriot Act to give law enforcement new tools to track terrorists. (Applause.) The mission of the FBI is now focused on preventing terrorism.We're integrating intelligence and law enforcement better than we have ever before. When it comes to better protecting America, we're turning the corner, and we're not turning back. (Applause.) We will do more to better secure our ports and borders, to train first responders, to dramatically improve our intelligence gathering capabilities. Reform is not easy, and it never is; achieving reform takes -- requires taking on the special interests, requires challenging the status quo.You see, it's not enough to advocate reform -- you have to be able to get it done. (Applause.) When it comes to reforming schools provide an excellent education for all our children, results matter. When it comes to health care reforms to give families more access and more choices, results matter. When it comes to improving our economy and creating new jobs, results matter. (Applause.) When it comes to better securing our homeland and fighting the forces of terror, results matter. (Applause.) And when it comes to choosing a President, results matter. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: This week, members of the other party gathered in Boston. We heard a lot of clever speeches, and some big promises. My opponent has good intentions, but intentions do not always translate to results. (Applause.)After 19 years in the United States Senate, my opponent has had thousands of votes, but very few signature achievements. (Applause.) During eight years on the Senate Intelligence Committee, he voted to cut the intelligence budget. And he had no record of reforming America's intelligence-gathering capability. He had no significant record for reforming education and health care. As a matter of fact, he and his running mate consistently opposed reforms that limit the power of Washington and leave more power in the hands of the people. (Applause.)He's spent nearly 20 years in the federal government, and it appears he's concluded that it's just not big enough. (Laughter.) He's proposed more than $2 trillion of additional federal spending, and he's just getting started. (Laughter.) The problem is, he hasn't told us how he's going to pay for it. We can figure it out, can't we?AUDIENCE: Yes!THE PRESIDENT: He's had a history of voting for higher taxes.AUDIENCE: Yes!THE PRESIDENT: We're going to make it clear his prescription for America is the wrong medicine. (Applause.) We're not turning back to the old days, the old Washington mind set that says they will give the orders, you will pay the bills. We've turned a corner from that way of thinking, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)These are exciting times for our country. It's a time of amazing change. The economy is changing. The world is changing. In our parents' generation, moms usually stayed home while fathers worked for one company until retirement. The company provided health care, and training, and a pension. Many of the government programs and most basic systems, from health care to Social Security to the tax code were based, and still are based on those old assumptions.This is a different world. Workers change jobs and careers frequently. Most of these jobs are created by small businesses. They can't afford to provide health care or pensions or training. Parents are working; they're not at home. We need to make sure government changes with the times, and to work for America's working families. You see, American workers need to own their own health care accounts. They need to own and manage their own pensions and retirement systems. (Applause). They need more ownership so they can take the benefits from job to job. They need flex-time so they can work out of the home.All of these reforms are based on this conviction: The role of government is not to control or dominate the lives of our citizens. (Applause.) The role of government is to help our citizens gain the time and the tools to make their own choices and improve their own lives. (Applause.) That's why I will continue to work to usher in a new era of ownership and opportunity in America. We want more people owning their own home. We want more people owning their own business. We want more people owning and managing their own health care system. We want more people owning and managing a part of their retirement systems. When a person owns something, he or she has a vital stake in the future of the United States of America. (Applause.)In this world of rapid change, some things will never change. Our conviction that every life matters and every life counts will not change. (Applause.) Our belief in liberty and opportunity and the non-negotiable demands of human dignity will not change. (Applause.) The individual values we try to live by -- courage and compassion, reverence and integrity, hard work and duty -- won't change. (Applause.) We'll always honor the institutions that give us direction and purpose, our families, our schools, our religious congregations. (Applause.) These values and institutions are fundamental to our future. They deserve the respect of our government. (Applause.)We stand for institutions like marriage and family, which are the foundations of society. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every person counts. We stand for judges who strictly and faithfully interpret the law, instead of legislating from the bench. (Applause.) And we will work together to build a culture of responsibility. The culture of this country is changing from one that has said, if it feels good, just go ahead and do it, and, if you've got a problem, blame somebody else, to a culture in which each of us understands that we're responsible for the decisions we make in life. (Applause.)If you are fortunate to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.) If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. (Applause.) If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.) And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor, just like we'd like to be loved ourselves. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another one began. September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day that I will never forget. I remember the workers in hard hats yelling at me, ""Whatever it takes."" I remember a fireman or a policeman, I can't remember which one, looking me in the eyes and saying, ""Do not let me down."" As those folks did that day, and like many other Americans, we took it personally. I took it personally. I have a responsibility that goes on. I wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect our country. I will never relent in defending America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)We've come through much together. We've done some hard work. We've turned a corner. We've moved -- we're moving America forward by extending freedom and peace around the world. We're expanding opportunity here at home. During the next four years, we will spread ownership and opportunity to every corner -- every corner of this country. We will pass the enduring values of our country to another generation. We will lead the cause of freedom and peace and we will prevail. With your support, and with your prayers, I will be a leader America can count on in a world of change. (Applause.)Four years ago, as I traveled this great country asking for the vote, I made a pledge to my fellow Americans, that if you honored me with this great responsibility, I would uphold the dignity and the honor of the office to which I had been elected. (Applause.) With your help, I will do so for four more years. (Applause.)Thanks for coming. May God bless. (Applause.) Thank you, all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"   Thanks for the warm introduction. It's really good to be here. You know, Marc, you're right, the National Urban League is a vital and important part of the American scene. And I think the reason why is, not only is the mission important, but the people involved in the Urban League are dignified, decent American citizens.  And I am honored to be in your presence.I see some friends like Willard who is -- I don't know if you remember, Willard, but we were on the porch of the governor's mansion in Texas. I'm not saying you drank all my beer, but -- (laughter.) Never mind. (Laughter.) That's unfair. (Laughter.) But thanks for having me.Marc, I appreciate your leadership. I've had the opportunity to work with Marc. I look forward to continue working with Marc. He's a good man. He cares deeply about the country, the people in our country. He is -- he has had a lot of experience. He has, after all, been a mayor. It's a heck of a lot tougher job than being President. After all, you've got to fill the potholes -- (laughter) -- and empty the garbage. And he did a fine job as mayor. He's doing a fine job for this very important organization.Speaking about mayors, the mayor of Detroit was here. He's cutting a ribbon, which most mayors do. He's a fabulous mayor, by the way. He's standing a little taller, as if he needed to, because the Detroit Pistons are now the NBA champs. (Applause.) I told him, I said -- I asked Kwame if he took credit for it. He said, of course. (Laughter.)I appreciate so very much Mike Critelli, who is the Chairman. Thank you, Mr. -- Mike, it's great to see you again. And Charles Collins, senior -- the Vice Chairman. These are distinguished gentlemen who are helping to lead a very distinguished board of directors. It was my honor to meet with members of the board before I came out here today. And I appreciate your service to our country.Rick, thank you very much. Rick Wagoner is the CEO of General Motors, who is sponsoring this conference. I appreciate you doing that. It's an important conference and corporate America needs to stand up and help organizations that are out to help other people, and you've done so. And I know people here appreciate that.I appreciate Reverend Ernest Ferrell's blessings. They asked me before the speech whether or not I would object to a prayer. I said, absolutely not. All of us need prayer, and I appreciate that. (Applause.)And I appreciate Reverend Jesse Jackson. Thanks for coming, again. (Applause.)And it's hard to run for office. Isn't it, Al? (Laughter.) Al Sharpton is with us. (Applause.) But I appreciate you putting your hat in the ring. (Laughter.) It's not an easy thing. It looks easy.REVEREND SHARPTON: It's not over.THE PRESIDENT: There you go. It's not over. (Laughter and applause.) Just don't declare right now. (Laughter.) Welcome. Glad you're here.Thank you all for coming.The thing I like about the National Urban League is you believe in the future of the African American community. You've got this great faith that the future is going to be better, and I share that. That's what I'm here to talk about. I believe the same thing.I believe this country can and will be a place of opportunity and hope for every single citizen. It's not a given; there's work to be done. But it's a goal, and it's an important goal.I don't care what party you're in, what city you live in, or what state you're from, the goal has got to be -- America has got to be an hospitable, hopeful place for every single citizen. That's what I believe. That's kind of the heart of what they call compassionate conservatism, that the American experience must be alive and viable for everyone, and that government has a role to help people have the tools so they can help themselves. See, I believe in the human spirit; I believe if people have the opportunity and the ability, they will achieve their God-given talents. That's what I believe. And I think that's a proper role for the federal government, to help people.The last three-and-a-half years, we've worked on that. We've worked hard to make opportunity available and prosperity real and justice not a word. And I'm here to tell you, we're making good progress.Progress for African Americans and all Americans require a healthy, growing economy. It's hard to realize dreams if -- if you're in a recession; it's hard to realize dreams if jobs aren't being created; it's hard to realize dreams if the entrepreneurial spirit is flat, at best, and that's not the case today.It says a lot about our country that -- that we've recovered from a recession. Remember, the recession was started before September the 11th -- as a matter of fact, right as I came to office. The stock market had been declining for nine months. In other words, the indications weren't all that viable for the economy.And then we got hit, and the attacks hurt. It hurt our psyche, it hurt our economy, it hurt the ability to find work. And then we uncovered the fact that some of our citizens forgot what it meant to be a responsible citizen. See, we had some CEOs in corporate America that didn't tell the truth to their shareholders and their employees. That also hurt the economy. It took confidence away from a system that requires confidence.We acted. It should be clear now to all Americans that we're not going to tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of America. We expect the high standard, and there will be enforcement of law to enforce that standard.So the economy went through a lot. But we acted. See, I happen to believe if people have more of their own money in their pocket, they're going to spend, save, or invest, and when they do, that revitalizes economic growth and entrepreneurship. That's what the tax cuts were all about. That's why we raised the child credit. If you happen to have a two-year-old son like Mark does, it enables you to be -- have more money in your pocket. We reduced the marriage penalty. What kind of tax code is it, by the way, that penalizes marriage? We ought to be encouraging marriage in the United States of America. (Applause.)We reduced the 10 percent bracket; we reduced taxes on everybody. I think that's the fair way to do things. And as a result, the economy is growing. The economy, since last summer, has been growing at the fastest rate in nearly 20 years. That's the truth, and that's positive news. If people are looking for work, you've got to have an economy which is vibrant and growing.And that's the case. We've added 1.5 million new jobs since August. There's more work to do, of course. Job opportunity isn't in every neighborhood and every corner of the country, I fully recognize that. But the economy today is strong, and it's growing stronger. And we've always got to remember why. I mean, inherent in the -- in new job creation is small businesses. That's the most important part of new job creation. See, most new jobs are created by the small business owners of America. And therefore, policy has got to recognize that. That's why we've got to have fair -- a fair legal system that doesn't -- these frivolous lawsuits make it awfully difficult for a small business owner to thrive.We've got to have affordable health care. We must have trade policy that enables small businesses to sell products overseas. That says we're going to level the playing field. Listen, we can compete with anybody, anyplace, anywhere if the rules are fair, which is precisely what this administration is doing. They need less regulation on small businesses.But remember about the tax policy in terms of small businesses. Most small businesses pay tax at the individual income tax rate. See, that's reality. Ask your friends and neighbors who are entrepreneurs. They will tell you they're either a sole proprietorship or a subchapter S corporation, which means they pay tax at the individual income tax rate. And so when you cut the individual income taxes, you're really helping small business owners. It's an entrepreneur -- we're stimulating growth and the small business sector of America today is alive and well. And more minorities are owning their own small businesses, and that's really good for the future of the country.See, if you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of America. This administration promotes what I call the ownership society. When people tell me statistics, they say, more people are owning their own small businesses, and a lot of minorities are owning their own small businesses. That's really good news for the future of the country. It also happens to be really good news for the economy. The more small businesses there are, the more likely it is people are going to find work.And there's more we can do to help people start their own businesses. The SBA has got a vital role -- that's the Small Business Administration. Loans to African Americans were up by 75 percent from last year. That's positive. In other words, somebody said, I need some help. They've come to the federal government. They said, I've got an idea, I want to start my own business, I want to say, I'm the owner. And the government says, we want to help you. It's a legitimate role to encourage ownership.And that's what's happening right now in our society. We've rewarded $6 billion in new markets tax credits. Those are important. They promote economic and community development in low-income areas. And when you do that, the spinoff is more ownership for businesses. When there's a vitality in a neighborhood that has been -- that needed help, new businesses spring up. That's all part of a vital tomorrow. Our plan is to help people help themselves, is to create an environment where the entrepreneur can flourish.Marc, I read your comments, and the National Urban League is a partner in the $127 million reward we announced in May this year just to do that, to create an environment where people have a chance to realize their dreams by owning their own business. (Applause.)An interesting project that's going on inside inner cities, which makes life better but also helps the entrepreneurial spirit, is the cleanup of brownfields. Since I've come to office, we've cleaned up more than 1,000 brownfields. Those are old industrial sites which have been abandoned. They're not only eyesores, they're blight in the communities. They've been cleaned up. They're now viable pieces of property. Businesses are springing up -- businesses around, businesses are springing up. An integral part of stimulating economic growth and activity to give people a chance to start and own their own company is wise policy in the inner city, such as brownfields cleanup policy. We've been aggressive with brownfields, just like we have with empowerment zones.What I'm telling you is, the role of government is to create an environment where people from all walks of life have a chance to realize their dream. And that's precisely what's taking place in America. And the economy is better for it, and more people are finding work, and we must not go backward to the days of high taxes, high spending, more regulation and more lawsuits, if we expect more people to own their own business.Secondly, we've got work to do to encourage and train a new generation of entrepreneurs. And that's why I'm pleased to announce today that we're joining with the Urban League to expand minority business ownership. (Applause.) It's an interesting project. You can't say to somebody, you must be an entrepreneur. You can't say that. But you can say, if you want to start your own business, we'll help you. And I want to thank Marc's leadership on this and the board's leadership in understanding the need to work with the federal government to set up what they call one-stop centers where minority enterprise can receive business training. It's one thing to say, let's go be an entrepreneur. But if you're not certain how to do it, people need help. You may have a great idea, but you're not sure how to keep the books. It's a practical application of federal assets to help people understand how to own and run their own business. You can develop contacts there. You get advice on financing. It's practical ways to help people realize their dreams, is what we're talking about here.The Business Roundtable, I'm pleased to say, those are the CEOs of big corporate America, the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation -- he used to be the owner of the Kansas City Royals, he's a fine guy from Missouri -- will support the work of the centers. And so, in other words, it's a collaborate effort. The federal government, the Urban League and these other citizens are coming together and saying, we're going to set up these centers to help people help themselves. (Applause.)Progress for African Americans, and progress for all Americans, requires good schools. (Applause.) The system tended to shuffle kids through, and you know what I'm talking about. You know, the hard-to-educate were labeled that, and they just moved through, that's what was happening. We can play like it wasn't happening. It was happening. That's what you get when you get low expectations. It's what I call the soft bigotry of low expectations.When I first came to the Urban League, I vowed to change that attitude in Washington. It was one of the things I said. I said, give me a chance to work the education system. And we have. We passed good law. Listen, the government has got a funding responsibility. We have. We've increased federal funding for K through 12 by 49 percent from 2001. I label that significant. (Applause.)But you know what else has changed? For the first time, the federal government is asking the question, can our children actually read? And see, I feel comfortable asking that question, because I believe every child can read. You don't ask that question if you believe certain children cannot read; you say, okay, fine, shuffle them through, the consequences of which, when people get out of high school, they're illiterate, they're lost, they're frustrated. They don't have a chance to realize the great promise of the country. We're changing that attitude in public schools.We say, we're going to have local control of schools. I really don't want the federal government trying to run the school systems of America. I think that would be cumbersome, too bureaucratic, stifling. It wouldn't encourage innovation, it wouldn't say to the school boards, be imaginative and strong and smart.We stand with our teachers. But we're going to measure now in America, because we want to know. Our goal is for every child to be reading at grade level by the third grade, because we believe every child can do that. And now we want them to show --just please show us whether or not it's -- whether or not you're achieving the objective. Because every child matters, see. If you don't measure, you do not know. (Applause.) If you don't take time to determine whether or not a child has got the skills necessary to succeed in America, you'll never find out until it's too late.The philosophy of the No Child Left Behind Act says, every child can learn, we expect every child to learn, and we expect you to show us whether or not every child is learning. (Applause.)And it's paying off. The test scores, the accountability systems are beginning to show that African American fourth graders are catching up. There is an education gap in America and so long as there is an education gap, we must be relentless in our pursuit for excellence. (Applause.)By the way, the law says that if -- we're going to detect problems early before they're too late and correct them, that's why we started measuring early. And there's money in the budgets that say, if you need extra help, we'll help correct them. It says to parents, that if the schools continue to fail, if they won't adjust, if a child is trapped in mediocrity, parents have different choices to make. See, this is all part of making sure we focus on the child, not the process, so no child in America is left behind. (Applause.)And there's more to do. I'm working with Congress, hopefully over the next four years, for intensive reading intervention programs. It's one thing to start early, but there's a -- you can imagine there's a group of kids that need to be saved now before it's too late -- eighth and ninth grade intervention programs. I know in Florida, there's some great intervention programs. Willard, you'll probably take credit for them, but they -- (laughter) -- they're beginning to work well. They're good. It says we're not going to quit on any child. We're going to be involved.We need to make sure a high school diploma means something. When a kid comes out of high school, an employer or community college, the college says, that means something when they hold up a high school diploma.And so we've got to make sure we continue to work not only in the early grades, but in the later grades in public education so that people can say, I've got something that means something. It's a -- it's a certification for the ability to read, write, add, and subtract, to understand -- to understand the sciences and maths, as well. That's possible, see. You've got to think it's possible in the first place, otherwise you wouldn't insist upon it.Plus, I want to make sure the community college system is vibrant. I put money aside and will continue to do so for the community colleges. They're available, affordable, they're accessible, they're good things, they can change their curriculum to meet the needs of a local community. They actually train people for jobs which exist. They're good opportunities for kids coming out of high school. Look, education is the future of the country. And that's why, under my administration, we've increased the number of men and women who will be receiving Pell Grants to nearly one million. (Applause.)And why, under my budget, funding for historically black colleges is at an all-time high. (Applause.) It's what I said I would do when I was running for President, see. I told people I'd do that, and I've done it. And the country is better off for it, because education is the cornerstone of a hopeful tomorrow.I was proud to support Mayor Tony Williams. He's my Mayor right now. I've got one mayor in Crawford and one mayor in Washington. (Laughter.) Tony is the Mayor of Washington. He's a very good Mayor, by the way. He's a good man. Maybe you know him. But he and I -- (applause.) I work with Tony. And I signed a bill into law creating taxpayer-sponsored scholarships for students in Washington, D.C. And let me tell you why. I believe this: If school choice is good for the wealthy, it's good enough for disadvantaged children in America. This is a good piece of legislation. (Applause.) It's a good piece of legislation, which is going to help improve education for all children in the nation's capital.Progress for African Americans and all Americans depends on more citizens living the dream of owning their own home. There's nothing better than somebody saying, welcome to my house; I'm putting out the welcome mat in my piece of property. (Applause.) And this has been a focus of this administration, because we want people owning their own home. It's a vital part of the -- of the American experience, isn't it.So we're providing downpayment assistance, good counseling. Listen, people walk in, first-time home buyers, and they take a look at the contracts and the print's about that big, and they say, forget it. You know? They get driven away by the complexity of the situation. Sometimes they get skinned by loan sharks, you know? And we're doing everything we can to make sure the loan application process is understandable and fair and open. We're proposing tax credits to encourage the building of more affordable housing, particularly in inner-city America. In other words, we want there to be a greater supply of homes. (Applause.)Let me tell you something hopeful about the country. For the first time in our history, a majority of families and minority groups own their own homes. We're making progress. People are saying, this is my home. And we must continue the progress we're making. (Applause.)Progress for African Americans and all Americans depends on safe streets. Safe streets are important for any -- any community, particularly important for communities in which parents feel like they've got to keep their kids locked in.And so we're making progress there. We've increased federal prosecutors. And I want to tell you something, federal gun law prosecutions are up by 68 percent in the last three years. See, it's one thing to, you know, say, we're going to pass laws. The thing is, you've got to enforce the law. If you're going to want safe streets, you've got to do a good job of enforcing the laws on the books, which is precisely what we're doing. And as a result, violent crime in America is down by 21 percent during my administration. That's positive for people. (Applause.) Property crime is down 13 percent.But there's more than just fighting crime. We need to help the 600,000 men and women who are being released from prison each year. I went to the Congress in my State of the Union, I talked about a prison reentry program. I said, put some money up to help these souls come out. Let's make sure we're the country of the second chance. Let's make sure people have got a chance to get an education and a job. Let's make sure there's -- if need be, let's make sure there's church families available to welcome a person back in community. (Applause.) And so this prison reentry program is a vital part of making sure America is a safe country. (Applause.)Progress for this country, for African Americans, and all Americans, depends on the full protection of civil rights and equality before the law. My administration and its Justice Department has vigorously enforced the civil rights laws. The Civil Rights Division has opened a federal investigation into the murder of Emmett Till. (Applause.)I'm the first President of the United States to ban racial profiling in federal law enforcement. (Applause.)And to serve the cause of justice on the bench, the federal bench, I have nominated outstanding men and women to the courts, including six superbly qualified African Americans for the courts of appeal and 11 for district courts. (Applause.)Progress for African Americans and for all Americans depends on driving the drugs out of our neighborhoods. We put forth a comprehensive approach. We're doing everything we can to interdict drugs so they don't make it into the country in the first place. We have encouraged faith-based programs to help change hearts so people change habits. (Applause.) We've got money directed at the people who need the most help, which are the addicts of America -- an intensive, focused, real effort to save lives.But we're also working to reduce demand in the country. It's a community effort. We're bringing together all aspects of the community organizations to say to our youngsters, don't use those drugs. And we're making progress. From 2001 to 2003, youth drug use has declined by 11 percent. We're headed in the right direction. We're saying to our kids, be responsible with your bodies, be responsible with your behavior, and you have a chance to understand the great promise of America. It's a vital effort. This isn't a Republican cause or a Democrat cause; this is a community cause, this is an American cause and it's important to work together. (Applause.)Progress for all our citizens, including African Americans, depends on the spirit of compassion for others. Government can hand out money, but it cannot put hope in a person's heart or a sense of purpose in a person's lives. And we'll have the traditional programs of help, the safety nets. They're there. And that's an important part of federal funding. But I strongly believe the federal government must welcome programs of faith into the compassionate delivery of help and service to those who hurt. (Applause.)My community and faith-based initiative recognizes the true strength of this country is in the hearts and souls of our citizens; that we recognize that oftentimes there's -- a change of heart will change behavior and governments can't change hearts. That changes when somebody who has heard a universal call to love a neighbor, puts their arm around somebody who hurts and says, I love you brother, I love you sister, what can I do to help you on your walk so your life is improved. (Applause.) This community and faith-based initiative is a vital part of this administration's program to help save lives. We've opened up federal grants to the faith community for the first time. I shouldn't say ""for the first time."" Most vigorously, let me put it to you that way.And so now we've had over a billion dollars go out the door to faith-based programs, programs all aimed at serving America by saving lives. (Applause.) And it makes sense. It just makes sense. It makes sense to tap into the great strength and spirit of the country.The Associated Black Charities of Baltimore, ask them what it's like to be a partner with the federal government. Or the Black Ministerial Alliance in Boston. Or the Metro Denver Black Church Initiative. These are all initiatives, all aimed at saying to somebody: the future is better for you, somebody loves you, we care, and we're going to help you. We're going to help mentor you, we'll save you from drugs and alcohol. We'll do everything in our power to save America one soul at a time. (Applause.)We've done a lot in three-and-a-half years. I ask you to look at the record of accomplishment. And I didn't do this alone. I've got a good administration, really good people. It's a diverse Cabinet. It's a Cabinet full of strong people. It's a Cabinet who are serving our country first. People like Rod Paige. You've heard my talk about education. I hope you have a sense of my passion to make sure we get it right. I understand the importance of schools in America. I picked a good man to serve as the head of the Education Department, Rod Paige. He was -- (applause.) You heard me talk about owning your own home, it's a vital part of this future of this country. Alphonso Jackson is the head of the Housing and Urban Development. (Applause.) Kay James runs the Office of Personnel Management. You know, the government owns a lot of property. Steve Perry is the head of the GSA. (Applause.)We've got a diverse cabinet, diverse administration, people who serve our nation with dignity. You know, when it comes time to money, Allen Greenspan is a smart guy, so is the Vice Chairman, Roger Ferguson, of the Federal Reserve. (Applause.) Chairman of the FCC, the Federal Communications Commission, Michael Powell -- in other words, what I'm telling you is -- (applause) -- I feel I have an obligation to reach out to people from all walks of life. I have met that obligation, and the government is better for it. (Applause.)And when it comes to national security, thankfully I've had a good team. We've had some big challenges in this country. And I've got a strong foreign policy, because the architects of that policy are people like Condi Rice and Colin Powell. (Applause.) These are good people. I've seen them -- I've seen them under incredible pressure. I know their steadiness and their clear vision.See, our most solemn duty is to protect the American people. That's our most solemn duty. It's a duty brought upon us not at our asking, because we were attacked unmercifully by people who hate what we stand for. They hate the fact that we can have free dialogue just like this. They hate the fact that there's open discourse. They hate the fact that we're a free society where people can worship any way they see fit.They hate the idea that we welcome people who worship God and we welcome people who don't worship God. They can't stand the thought that we're a society that says, if you choose to worship, you're equally American, if you're a Christian, Jew, or Muslim.And so they attacked us. And we have a duty, all of us have a duty to respond. This is an American effort to protect ourselves. And Colin Powell and Condi Rice have provided valuable, valuable advice and counsel during these tough times.And we're making progress. Listen, we're trying to do everything we can to protect our homeland. There's people from all walks of life working hard to protect the American people. There's no such thing as perfect security. I tell people, we've got to be right 100 percent of the time. Those who want to cause us harm have to be right once. But there's a lot of people working. It doesn't matter what your party is, they're working hard to protect the American people. And we've got a lot of people overseas working to protect us, too, by bringing justice to the enemies before they strike again. (Applause.)Our foreign policy is tough and it's compassionate. It's tough and we have to be tough, it's compassionate. We liberated over 50 million people who were brutalized by tyrants. We're proud to lead the armies of liberation. We're standing true to this great American ideal that freedom is the almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)We've begun the largest initiative ever to combat global AIDS. America is in the lead on dealing with the pandemic that ravages the continent of Africa. We're taking the lead because we're a compassionate nation. We feed more of the hungry than any nation on the face of the Earth. We're a compassionate nation.We're also a wise nation when it comes to smart policy. I signed the African Growth and Opportunity Acceleration Act of 2004. It recognizes that the best way to help lift people out of poverty is to trade, it's through the free flow of commerce. And it's working on the -- this policy is working on the continent of Africa.Problems come to our desk because of our influence in the world. We've dealt with Liberia. We're now dealing with Sudan. The United States is working closely with the United Nations. As a matter of fact, the Secretary of State was recently with Kofi Annan talking about this very subject. We're working closely with the African Union to bring relief to the suffering people in that region. We've made our position very clear to the Sudanese government: They must stop the Janjaweed violence. They must provide access for humanitarian relief to the people who suffer. (Applause.)Ours is a solid record of accomplishment. And that's why I've come to talk about compassionate conservatism and what I envision for the future. I'm here for another reason. I'm here to ask for your vote. (Applause.)No, I know, I know, I know. The Republican party has got a lot of work to do. I understand that. (Laughter and applause.) You didn't needto nod your head that hard, Jesse. (Laughter.)Do you remember a guy named Charlie Gaines? Somebody gave me a quote he said, which I think kind of describes the environment we're in today. I think he's a friend of Jesse's. He said, ""Blacks are gagging on the donkey but not yet ready to swallow the elephant."" (Laughter and applause.)Now that was said a while ago. (Laughter.) I believe you've got to earn the vote and seek it. I think you've got to go to people and say, this is my heart, this is what I believe, and I'd like your help. And as I do, I'm going to ask African American voters to consider some questions.Does the Democrat party take African American voters for granted? (Applause.) It's a fair question. I know plenty of politicians assume they have your vote. But do they earn it and do they deserve it? (Applause.) Is it a good thing for the African American community to be represented mainly by one political party? That's a legitimate question. (Applause.) How is it possible to gain political leverage if the party is never forced to compete? (Applause.) Have the traditional solutions of the Democrat party truly served the African American community?That's what I hope people ask when they go to the community centers and places, as we all should do our duty and vote. People need to be asking these very serious questions.Does blocking the faith-based initiative help neighborhoods where the only social service provider could be a church? Does the status quo in education really, really help the children of this country? (Applause.)Does class warfare -- has class warfare or higher taxes ever created decent jobs in the inner city? Are you satisfied with the same answers on crime, excuses for drugs and blindness to the problem of the family? (Applause.)Those are legitimate questions that I hope people ask as this election approaches. I'd like to hear those questions debated on talk radio, I'd like it debated in community centers, in the coffee shops. It's worthy of this country for this debate to go forward and these questions to be asked and answered.I'm here to say that there is an alternative this year. There is an alternative that has had a record that is easy to see. If you dream of starting a small business and building a nest egg and passing something of value to your children, take a look at my agenda. If you believe schools should meet high standards instead of making excuses, take a look at my agenda. If you believe the institutions of marriage and family are worth defending and need defending today, take a look at my agenda. (Applause.)If you believe in building a culture of life in America, take a look at my agenda. If you believe in a tireless fight against crime and drugs, take a look at this agenda. If you believe that our men and women in uniform should be respected and supported 100 percent of the time, take a look at my agenda. (Applause.)If you're struggling to get into the middle class and you feel like you're paying plenty of taxes, take a look at my agenda. (Applause.)If you're a small business owner who is trying to expand your job base and are worried about excessive lawsuits, increasing taxes and over-regulation, take a look at this agenda. (Applause.)And finally, if you believe in the power of faith and compassion to defeat violence and despair and hopelessness, I hope you take a look at where I stand. (Applause.)You see, I believe in my heart that the Republican party, the party of Lincoln and Frederick Douglass, is not complete without the perspective and support and contribution of African Americans. (Applause.)And I believe in my heart that the policies and actions of this administration, policies that empower individuals and help communities, that lift up free enterprise and respect and honor the family, those policies are good for the nation as a whole. That's what I believe. And I'm here to thank you for giving me a chance to come and express those beliefs.I'm proud to be with an organization that does so good, so much good for the American people. I'm honored that your Chairman would extend an invitation to me. Thanks for coming, and may God bless you and may God continue to bless the country. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"   Thank you all very much. (Applause.) Gosh, thanks for the warm welcome. It is really good to be with you all tonight. There's nothing like being the President at the President's Dinner. (Laughter.) And with your help, I look forward to being your guest next  year, as well. (Applause.)I want to thank Tom Reynolds, who is my good friend, for his kind introduction. I appreciate the organizers of this fantastic dinner. Thank you all for coming. We're here for a really good cause, and that is to make sure Denny Hastert remains Speaker of the House, and Bill Frist Majority Leader of the Senate. (Applause.) It's not only a worthy cause, it is an important cause. The stakes of the country depend upon their leadership, their continued leadership. Plus, they're really good people.I'm sorry that Laura is not with me tonight. I know. She is -- she's camping. (Laughter.) But you know something? I am one lucky man that Laura said yes when I asked her to marry me. (Applause.) She's a great First Lady -- there's a lot of reasons why I think I ought to be given four more years, but perhaps the most important one is so that Laura will be the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.)I want to thank George Allen and Lamar Alexander for representing the Senate at this dinner. Thank you for your strong leadership. And I appreciate Bob Ney, as well, and Tom Reynolds for representing the House at the dinner, and helping to raise the money. (Applause.) These men did a fine job. I also am proud to recognize my fellow Texan -- the Majority Leader of the House of Representatives, Tom DeLay. Thank you for coming, sir. (Applause.)I appreciate all the dinner hosts who are here at the table. It kind of looks like the old politburo. (Laughter.) Doesn't act like the old politburo.I want to thank all the members of the Congress who are here. I'm proud to work with you. And thank you for representing our country with such dignity and class. (Applause.)I want to thank Secretary Ann Veneman, Secretary Elaine Chao, Secretary Tommy Thompson, for coming tonight, and thank you for being such good Cabinet members in my administration. (Applause.)I appreciate John Popper for lending his talents tonight. And I love the voice of Sara Evans. (Applause.)As we meet tonight, there are a little over 100 days until an historic election, and the campaigns are hitting full-swing. In recent days, I've been in Pennsylvania and Michigan and Minnesota and Wisconsin and West Virginia and Iowa and Missouri. Everywhere I go, the crowds are big, the enthusiasm is high, the signs are good -- we are on our way to victory. (Applause.)My opponent has been spending some time with his base, as well -- at a recent gala with his hollywo9od friends. (Laughter.) Evidently, things got a little out of hand. My name came up a few times. (Laughter.) And now the Senator refuses to release a tape of that whole enchanted evening. (Laughter.) Could be that his friends, whom he said conveyed the ""heart and soul of America,"" actually embarrassed themselves and the candidate. (Applause.) I have a different theory. You see, the tape shows a meeting of all those unnamed foreign leaders that the Senator says have endorsed him. (Applause.)Now he has a running mate. Some people say that Senator Edwards was chosen in part because of his boyish good looks. After all, People Magazine once named John Edwards the ""sexiest politician."" One of my administration's great goals for a new term is to get Dick Cheney on that list. (Laughter and applause.) In the meantime, I value the Vice President's experience in government, his expertise in national security, and his sound judgment. (Applause.)It's now been three and a half years since the Vice President and I took office. We've faced significant challenges. WE have met them head-on. I believe it's the President's job to confront problems, not to pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. (Applause.) Because of our actions, America is becoming a safer and stronger and better country. (Applause.)Four years ago, our economy was headed into recession, and the stock market was in decline. So we passed historic tax relief for families and small businesses. Because we acted, our economy since last summer has been growing at the fastest rate in nearly 20 years. (Applause.) Because we acted, America has added more than 1.5 million new jobs since last August. (Applause.) Because we believe in economic freedom and left more money in the people's hands, America is a stronger country. (Applause.)My opponents look at all this progress and somehow conclude that the sky is falling. Whether their message is delivered with a frown or a smile, it is the same old pessimism. And to cheer us up, they propose higher taxes, more federal spending, and economic isolationism. But that's the surest way to end economic growth and put Americans out of work. This nation is on a rising path, and with four more years we'll achieve more growth, new and higher-paying jobs, and greater opportunity for all of our citizens. (Applause.)Four years ago, too many of our public schools were stuck in a cycle of mediocrity and excuse-making -- with children often shuffled from grade to grade, year after year. So we insisted on high standards and accountability, local control of schools, and now children across America are showing real progress in reading and math. And America is better for it. (Applause.)Four years ago, our Medicare system was falling behind modern medicine. Many seniors were not getting the drugs they needed. Because we have updated Medicare and passed prescription drug coverage for our parents and our grandparents, America is a better place. (Applause.)Four years ago, some of the finest, most effective charities in our country were viewed with suspicion or even hostility by our government, just because they ware faith-based charities. Because we have ended discrimination in government contracting, the armies of compassion are transforming more lives in our country, and America is better for it. (Applause.)In each of these areas, we are keeping our promises, we are doing our duty. Because of our actions, our economy is stronger, our schools are better, our country is safer. We have turned a corner, and there's no turning back. And in the weeks ahead, I will lay out an agenda worthy of this advancing and confident country.The American economy is creating good jobs. Now we must move forward, and make America even more job-friendly, by keeping taxes low. (Applause.) More job-friendly by making regulations reasonable and fair, and opening up new markets around the world. To keep our economy growing, we must pass a comprehensive energy plan, to make America more energy-independent. (Applause.)We will help more Americans get training at our community colleges for the jobs of the future. We'll protect workers and entrepreneurs from junk lawsuits that threaten to close the doors of too many small businesses and factories. (Applause.) You cannot be pro-small business and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent has made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. (Laughter and applause.) I've made my choice I will continue to work with Congress to end the junk lawsuits that hurt small businesses and threaten jobs all across our country. (Applause.)Across America, teachers and parents and principals are now working hard to raise the standards at our elementary schools, and to see that every child can read by the 3rd grade. Now we must move forward and make certain that our high schools are doing their jobs, as well. Every high school diploma must mean that our graduates are prepared for jobs, for college, and for success. (Applause.)The quality of health care in America is one of our great achievements. Now we must move forward to expand access to care, and to keep important health decisions in the hands of patients and doctors, not in government bureaucrats'. (Applause.) We need to make health care more affordable by making health insurance available to more Americans, by harnessing the power of information technology, and by limiting the costly and abusive litigation that threatens health care in America. (Applause.) America needs medical liability reform. No one has ever been healed by a frivolous lawsuit. (Applause.)Our country has made a lot of progress in ending dependency on government. Now we must move forward to strengthen work requirements that lead people from welfare to stable jobs. We need to encourage marriage and the family ties that improve the lives of our children. (Applause.) During the next four years, we'll help more citizens to own their health plan, to own a piece of their retirement, to own their own home or their own small business. We'll usher in a new era of ownership in America, with an agenda to help all our citizens save and build and invest, so every person owns a part of the American Dream. (Applause.)This broad agenda we will carry into the new term comes from a basic conviction: Government should never try to control or dominate the lives of our citizens. Yet government can and should help citizens gain the tools to make their own choices and to improve their own lives. When men and women have a sound education, and the skills to seize new opportunities, and the security of health care, they will achieve great things for themselves and for our nation. There is no greater force for good in this world than the energy of free people. (Applause.)Our opponents have a very different agenda. Senator Kerry has spent almost 20 years in the federal government, and he's concluded that it just isn't big enough. (Laughter.) He proposed nearly $2 trillion in additional federal spending, and we're just getting started. But he hasn't told us how he plans to pay for it all. I think we can guess. He has a history of voting to raise taxes. But we're going to make it clear to him that would be the wrong medicine for America's improving economy. (Applause.)He and his running mate consistently oppose reforms that limit the power of Washington and place trust in the individual. They share the same old Washington mind-set -- they will give the orders and you pay the bills. But we've gone beyond that way of thinking, and we're not going back. (Applause.)America's future also depends on our willingness to lead in the world. On a September morning, the world changed. And since that day we have changed the world. (Applause.) Before September the 11th, al Qaeda terrorists were plotting and moving across borders with little fear. Today, two-thirds of al Qaeda's known leaders have been captured or killed, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, the security of the American homeland was in grave danger. Our government was not organized to meet the new threat. We transformed our defenses; we created a new Department of Homeland Security. We rallied the world to pursue terrorists abroad and strengthen our laws to act against terrorists at home. We're using the Patriot Act to track terrorist activity and break up terror cells. We're using intelligence and law enforcement better than ever before. The mission of the FBI is now focused on preventing terrorism. In a vast and free nation such as ours, it is impossible to guarantee perfect security. But I can assure you, many fine professionals in intelligence and national security and homeland security and law enforcement are working around the clock; they're doing everything they can to protect us. And because of their vigilance, America is safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Afghanistan served as the home base of al Qaeda, which trained and deployed thousands of killers to set up terror cells in dozens of countries, including our own. Today, Afghanistan is a rising democracy, an ally in the war on terror, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up terrorists, they're an ally in the war on terror. America and the world is safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, in Saudi Arabia, terrorists were raising money, and recruiting and operating with little opposition. Today, the Saudi government is taking the fight to al Qaeda, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Today, because America and allies have sent a strong and clear message, the leader of Libya has abandoned his pursuit of weapons of mass destruction, and America and the world are safer. (Applause.)Before September the 11th, the ruler of Iraq was a sworn enemy of America. He was defying the world, and firing weapons at American pilots enforcing the world's sanctions. He had pursued and used weapons of mass destruction. He threatened his neighbors. He subsidized the families of suicide bombers. He had murdered tens of thousands of his own citizens. He was a source of great instability in the world's most volatile region That's why, even before September the 11th, the policy of our country was regime change in Iraq. After September the 11th, the risk that Saddam Hussein could have used weapons, or could have shared his capability to produce them with terrorists was simply too great.We went to the United States Congress, which overwhelmingly agreed; then to the United Nations Security Council, which unanimously demanded a full accounting of Saddam Hussein's weapons programs. When he again refused to comply, and continued to systematically deceive the weapons inspectors, we made the decision to remove him from power. (Applause.)Although we have not found the stockpiles of weapons that our intelligence showed would be there, we were right to go into Iraq. (Applause.) With Saddam Hussein in prison, America and the world are safer. (Applause.)We still have important and difficult work to do. Our immediate task is to work with friends and allies around the world, to continue aggressively pursuing the terrorist and foreign fighters in Afghanistan, in Iraq, and elsewhere. You can't talk sense to the terrorists. You cannot negotiate with terrorists. We must engage these enemies in Afghanistan and Iraq and around the world so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)The conditions for success in Afghanistan and Iraq are now coming together. These two nations are now governed by strong leaders, committed men, people who want peace and freedom for their people. The people of Iraq are taking more and more responsibility for their own security. They want to live in a free society. Men and women in Iraq want their children to grow up in a peaceful world. Schools and hospitals are being reopened. Citizens' lives are improving. Both nations are on the path to elections.The people of those countries can count on America and our coalition. When we acted to protect our own security, we also promised to help deliver them from tyranny, to restore their sovereignty, to set them on the path of democracy. And when America gives its word, America keeps its word. (Applause.)Over the next four years we will continue to defend our homeland, we'll continue to defeat the terrorists abroad. Yet, in the long run, our safety requires something more. We must work to change the conditions that give rise to terror in the Middle East: the poverty, and the hopelessness, and the resentments that terrorists too often exploit. Life in that region will be far more hopeful and peaceful when men and women can choose their own leaders, when the people can decide their own future. A free and peaceful Iraq, a free and peaceful Afghanistan will be powerful examples to their neighbors. Free countries do not export terror. Free countries do not stifle the dreams of their citizens. By serving the ideal of liberty, we are bringing hope to others, and that makes America more secure. (Applause.)By serving the ideal of liberty, we also serve the deepest ideals of our country. Freedom is not America's gift to the world; freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)Our men and women in the military are serving the cause of freedom. They're taking great risks on our behalf. At bases across the country and the world, I've had the privilege of meeting with those who defend our country and sacrifice for our security. I've seen their great decency and their unselfish courage. And I assure you, ladies and gentlemen, the cause of freedom is in good hands. (Applause.)We must make sure our troops have the very best. Last September, while our troops were in combat in both Afghanistan and Iraq, I proposed supplemental funding to support them in their missions. The legislation provided funding for body armor and other vital equipment, for hazard pay, for health benefits, for ammunition, for fuel, for spare parts for our military. In the Senate, only a small, out-of-the-mainstream minority of 12 senators voted against that legislation. And two of those 12 senators are my opponent and his running mate. (Applause.)Senator Kerry tried to explain his vote by saying, ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it."" (Laughter.) End quote. Now he's offering different explanations. Last week, Senator Kerry said he was ""proud"" that he and his running mate voted against the funding for the troops. Then he further said the whole thing is a ""complicated"" matter. There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.) Leaders need to stand behind our military, and back them up 100 percent. And that's what I will do every day that I am your President. (Applause.)America is leading the world with confidence and moral clarity. We put together a strong coalition to help defeat the terrorists. There are over 60 nations involved in the Proliferation Security Initiative, nearly 40 nations are involved in Afghanistan, some 30 nations involved in Iraq. We'll continue to build our alliances; we'll continue to work with our friends for the cause of security and peace. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other nations. (Applause.)This nation is prosperous and strong; yet we need to remember that our greatest strength is in the character of our citizens. Our nation is strong because of the values we try to live by: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. We're strong because of the institutions that help to give us direction and purpose: our families, our schools, our religious congregations. These values and institutions are fundamental to our lives; they deserve the respect of our government. (Applause.)We stand for institutions like marriage and family, which are the foundations of society. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person counts and every person matters. (Applause.) We stand for judges who strictly and faithfully interpret the law, instead of legislating from the bench. (Applause.)And we're building a culture of responsibility here in America. The culture of this country is changing from one that has said, if it feels good, do it, and if you've got a problem, blame somebody else, to a culture in which each of us understands we are responsible for the decisions we make in life. (Applause.) If you are fortunate enough to be a mother or father, you are responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.) If you're worried about the quality of the education in community in which you live, you are responsible for doing something about it. (Applause.) If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.) And in this new responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbors just like we'd like to be loved ourselves. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of the leaders; this isn't one of those times. None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It's a day I'll never forget. There were workers in hard-hats yelling at me, ""Whatever it takes."" A fellow grabbed me by the arm -- I can't remember if he was a policeman or fireman -- and he said, ""Do not let me down.""As we all did that day, these men and women searching through the rubble took it personally. I took it personally. I have a responsibility that goes on. I will never relent in bringing justice to our enemies. I will defend the security of our country, whatever it takes. (Applause.)In these times, I've also been a witness to the character of this nation. I've seen the unselfish courage of our troops. I've seen the heroism of Americans in the face of danger. I've seen the spirit of service and compassion renewed in our country, in the quiet love of neighbor for neighbor. We've all seen our nation unite in common purpose when it mattered most.Ladies and gentlemen, we have come through much together. We've done the hard work. We've made our nation better and safer. We've turned the corner in extending freedom throughout the world. We're expanding opportunity here at home. And now, we move forward with confidence. During the next four years, we will spread opportunity to every corner of this country. We will pass the enduring values of our country to another generation. We will continue to lead the cause of freedom and peace, and we will prevail.May God bless you all. (Applause.) Thank you all very much. God bless our great country. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"    Thank you all very much. I am proud to be back in Missouri, in this great city of St. Charles. (Applause.) John Ashcroft told me this morning that St. Charles was the first capital of Missouri. (Applause.) Today, the way things look, St. Charles is the capital of Bush-Cheney country. (Applause.) I always enjoy coming to the St. Louis area. You might remember the last time I was here, I brought my 30-mile-an-hour fastball. (Applause.)  Now look at the Cardinals. (Applause.)I'm here to ask for your vote. (Applause.) I'm here to let you know I've got more to do for this country and I want your help. I want you to go to your community centers and your places of worship and your -- all around this important part of the country and tell folks they have an obligation to vote. (Applause.) And you might remind them if they want optimistic, hopeful, determined leadership, vote for George W. Bush and Dick Cheney. (Applause.)With your help, we carried Missouri in 2000; with your help, we'll carry Missouri in 2004 as a part of a great nationwide victory. (Applause.) So thanks for coming. (Applause.) My only regret is that Laura is not traveling with me.AUDIENCE: Awwww!THE PRESIDENT: That's generally the reaction. (Laughter.) And the reason why is because the people understand she is a great First Lady. (Applause.) And I understand I'm a lucky man to have such a fine person as my wife. (Applause.) Tonight I'll give you some reasons why you need to put me back in office, but perhaps the most important reason is so that Laura will have four more years. (Applause.)I want to thank Madam Speaker for her kind introduction. Catherine, thank you for your leadership and your service. I want to thank my friend, Matt Blunt. Good to see you, Governor. (Applause.) Peter Kinder is here, and I'm proud Peter is here. I want to thank him for his friendship. Mike Gibbons, all those who serve at the state and local level, thank you for serving our communities and our country.I particularly want to say thanks to the grassroots activists who are here -- (applause.) The unsung heroes who make all the phone calls and put up the signs, and get people to register to vote, and remind people that if they're interested in helping, they can get on the Internet at the georgewbush.com site. (Applause.) I'm counting on your help. I'm counting on your support. I'll lay out the vision, you get the people to the polls, and we'll have four more years. (Applause.)And when you're convincing people to do their duty, remind them that the last three-and-a-half years have brought serious challenges, and we have given serious answers. (Applause.) We came to office with the stock market in decline, and an economy headed into recession. But we acted. We delivered historic tax relief, and over the past three years America has had the fastest growing economy of any major industrialized nation. (Applause.)We saw war and grief arrive on a quiet September morning. So we pursued the terrorist enemy across the world. We have captured or killed many leaders of the al Qaeda network. We will stay on the hunt until justice is done and America is secure. (Applause.)We confronted the dangers of state-sponsored terror, the spread of weapons of mass destruction. So we acted against two of the most violent and dangerous regimes on earth. We liberated over 50 million people. Once again, America is proud to lead the armies of liberation. (Applause.)When our great Vice President, Dick Cheney, and I -- (applause) -- when we came to Washington, the military was under funded and underappreciated. (Applause.) So we gave our armed forces the resources and respect they deserve, and today, nobody can question the skill and the strength and the spirit of the United States military. (Applause.)These accomplishments are important to the security and the prosperity of America. You see, it is the President's job to confront problems, not to pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. (Applause.) A President must make the hard decisions and keep his commitments. And with your help, that is how I will continue to lead our great nation for four more years. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: I'm looking forward to the contest. (Applause.) And it's going to be a hard race -- that's why I'm here to ask for your help. I'm running against -- I'm running against an experienced United States senator.THE AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He's been in Washington a long time -- long time. He's been there long enough to take both sides of just about every issue. (Laughter and applause.) He voted for the Patriot Act, NAFTA, the No Child Left Behind Act, and for the force -- use of force in Iraq. Now, he opposes the Patriot Act, NAFTA, the No Child Left Behind Act, and the liberation of Iraq. (Laughter.) If you disagree with the senator on most any issue, you may just have caught him on the wrong day. (Laughter and applause.)And as you know, he's picked a running mate. Senator Kerry is rated as the most liberal member of the United States Senate. And he chose a fellow lawyer, who is the fourth most liberal member of the United States Senate.THE AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, in Massachusetts, that's what they call balancing the ticket. (Laughter and applause.)Great events will turn on this election. The person who sits in the Oval Office will set the course of the war on terror. and the direction of our economy. I'm asking for your vote because I have a vision and a strategy to win the war on terror and to extend freedom and peace throughout the world. (Applause.) I'm asking for your vote because I have a plan and strategy to continue to create jobs and opportunity for every single American. I'm asking for your vote because I have a plan to continue to rally the armies of compassion, the compassionate spirit of this country, so every single American has a chance to realize the great promise of our land. I'm asking for your help -- and after four more years, America will be safer, stronger, and a better nation. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: A big issue for every family is the federal tax burden. By providing the largest --AUDIENCE MEMBER: Oh, it's killing me! (Laughter.)THE PRESIDENT: By providing the largest federal tax relief since Ronald Reagan was the President -- (applause) -- we've left more money in the hands that earned it. (Applause.) By spending and investing and helping create new jobs, the American people have used their money far better than the federal government would have. (Applause.)This economy of ours is strong and it's getting stronger. Since last summer, our economy has been growing at its fastest rate in nearly 20 years. (Applause.) In less than a year's time, we've added 1.5 million new jobs. (Applause.) In this great state, in the state of Missouri, 27,600 people went to work at a new job in June. (Applause.) Your unemployment rate is now 5.2 percent -- (applause) -- down from 5.8 percent last July. (Applause.) The homeownership rate is at its all-time high. (Applause.) Business investment is up, consumer confidence is strong. The tax relief we passed is working. (Applause.)My opponent looks at all this progress and somehow concludes that the sky is falling. (Laughter.) Whether their message is delivered with a frown or a grin, it's the same old pessimism. And to cheer us up, they propose higher taxes, more federal spending, more lawsuits, economic isolationism.THE AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: The surest way to end economic growth and to put Americans out of work is to adopt their vision. This nation is on the path to progress and opportunity, and we're not going back. (Applause.) To sustain economic growth we need to keep taxes low. (Applause.) Higher taxes would undermine growth and destroy jobs just as the economy is gaining more steam. To help grow the economy so people can find work, my message to Congress is: Do not raise taxes on the American people. (Applause.)In order to make sure Americans can find work today, and work tomorrow, we must be wise about how we spend the people's money. My plan calls for spending discipline. It calls for setting clear priorities. I also understand whose money we spend in Washington, D.C. -- we don't spend the government's money, we spend the people's money. (Applause.)In order to make sure this economy continues to grow and people can find work, we must stop the frivolous lawsuits. (Applause.) You cannot be pro-small business and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent has made his choice -- and he put him on the ticket.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I made my choice. I will continue to push the United States Congress to reform the legal system to end the junk and frivolous lawsuits that plague our small businesses. (Applause.)In order to make sure we continue to expand our job base, I have a plan to help more Americans afford health insurance, by giving people better access to health care through association health plans, giving Americans more control over their health care through tax-free health savings accounts. And to make sure that people have got affordable and available health care, we need medical liability reform into Washington, D.C. (Applause.)In order to make sure people can find work today and tomorrow, we need to pass sound energy legislation. I have proposed a plan to the United States Congress over two years ago. It is a plan that calls for more conservation. It's a plan that says we will develop renewable sources of energy. It's a plan that says we must modernize our electricity grid. It's also a plan that recognizes we can explore and use resources in the United States in environmentally friendly ways. (Applause.) For the sake -- for the sake of national security, and for the sake of economic security, we must become less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)I know we've got some farmers here. (Applause.) Thanks for working the land. (Applause.) The best way to make sure you continue -- your prosperity continues, is to sell your products overseas. The best way to make sure we've got jobs today and tomorrow is to make sure countries treat us like we treat them. We open our markets to their products, they open their markets to our product -- American compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere if the playing field is level. (Applause.)To sustain economic growth we need to make sure you reelect a pro-small business, pro-entrepreneur, pro-farmer administration. And that is the Bush-Cheney administration. (Applause.)America's future also depends on our willingness to lead in the world. The momentum of freedom in our time is strong. We still face serious dangers. Al Qaeda is wounded, but not broken. Terrorists continue to attack in places like Afghanistan and Iraq. Regimes in North Korea and Iran are challenging the peace. If America shows weakness or uncertainty in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)THE AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: After the attacks of September the 11th, 2001, this nation, the people of America resolved to fight the terrorists where they dwell. We resolved to hold regimes that hide and sponsor terrorists to account. Afghanistan was a terrorist state, a training camp for al Qaeda killers. Because we acted, Afghanistan is a rising democracy, Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. And because we acted, many young girls go to school for the first times in their lives. (Applause.)Iraq only last year was controlled by a dictator who threatened the civilized world and had used weapons of mass destruction against his own people. For decades he tormented and tortured the people of Iraq. Because we acted, Iraq is free and a sovereign nation. Because we acted, its dictator now sits in a prison cell and will receive the justice he denied so many for so long. (Applause.)September the 11th, 2001, taught a lesson I will never forget. And it is a lesson this country must never forget: America must confront threats before they fully materialize. (Applause.) With this lesson in mind, my administration looked at the intelligence and we saw a threat. Members of the United States Congress, from both political parties, looked at the same intelligence and they saw a threat. The United Nations Security Council looked at the intelligence and it saw a threat. The previous administration and the United States Congress looked at the intelligence and made regime change in Iraq the policy of our government. In 2002, the United Nations Security Council yet again demanded a full accounting of Saddam Hussein's weapons programs. And as he had for decades -- for over a decade, he deceived the world. As he had for over a decade, he refused to comply.So I had a choice to make: Either trust the word of a madman, or take action to defend our country. (Applause.) And given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)Although we have not found the stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction that we thought were there, we were right to go into Iraq. (Applause.) America is safer because we did. (Applause.) We removed a declared enemy of America who had the capability of producing weapons of mass destruction, and could have passed that capability to terrorists bent on acquiring them. In a world after September the 11th, that was a risk we could not afford to take. (Applause.)We still have important and difficult work to do. Our immediate task in Iraq and Afghanistan and elsewhere is to capture or kill the terrorists. You can't talk sense to the terrorists. You cannot negotiate with these terrorists. You cannot sit back and hope for the best. We will engage these enemies in Afghanistan and Iraq and around the world, so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)In this big, sweet country of ours, there's no such thing as perfect security. And the threats to this homeland are real. We know that the terrorists want to strike the United States again, they want to disrupt our way of life, or cause panic or great fear. We reorganized this government of ours to better protect the people. There's much better communication now between the federal, state and local governments. The FBI has changed its mission to make sure -- changed its priorities to make sure that counterterrorism is the most important thing they do.I want you to know there are a lot of really good people working on your behalf -- good, decent, honorable people. I know you'll join me in thanking the police and firefighters and emergency teams of St. Louis, Missouri. (Applause.)Over these next four years we will defend our homeland. Over the next four years we'll be relentless in the pursuit of the enemy abroad. Yet, in the long run, our safety requires something more. We must work to change the conditions that give rise to terror in the Middle East -- the poverty, the hopelessness, and the resentments that terrorists can exploit.See, life in that region will be far more hopeful and peaceful when men and women can choose their own leaders, when the people can decide their own future. You see, by serving the ideal of liberty, we're bringing hope to others. And that makes America more secure. By serving the ideal of liberty, we serve the deepest ideals of our country. Freedom is not America's gift to the world; freedom is the Almighty God's gift to every man and woman in this world. (Applause.)America is leading the world, and the world is changing because of our leadership. Three years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda. Now the camps are closed, democracy is rising and the American people are safer. (Applause.) Three years ago -- three years ago, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists on missions of murder. Now Pakistan forces are rounding up the terrorists, Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror and the American people are safer. (Applause.)Three years ago, in Saudi Arabia, terrorists were moving with little opposition. Now the Saudi government has taken the fight to al Qaeda, and Americans are safer for it. Three years ago, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Now, thousands of Libya's chemical munitions have been destroyed. Libya has given up nuclear processing equipment and the American people are safer for it. (Applause.)Three years ago there was a network run by a Pakistan nuclear scientist named A.Q. Khan that was selling secrets, nuclear secrets to countries like Iran and North Korea and Libya. Thanks to the hard work of CIA agents, thanks to cooperation between the British and United States government, that network has been dismantled, it is no longer a problem and America is safer for it. (Applause.)In the last three years the world is changing, for the better. Just like Iraq is changing for the better. We will finish our work of spreading democracy and helping the Iraqis achieve democracy. We'll finish our work to help the Afghan citizens achieve democracy. Democratic states, free states are peaceful states. It's in our long-term interest that these countries survive, and we've got good allies there. (Applause.) President Karzai believes in the future of the people of Afghanistan. Prime Minister Allawi believes in the future of the people of Iraq. He wants there to be a free country, just like the fathers and mothers of Iraqi children want their children to grow up in a free and peaceful country. (Applause.)People in Iraq are stepping up. They understand the stakes. They're fighting the foreign fighters and the terrorists. They're bringing them to justice so they can live in a free society. And the people of those countries can count on the United States of America -- when we give our word, when we'll stay with people striving to become a free society -- we will keep our word. (Applause.)America is safer not only because we've led; America is safer because we've got a great United States military. (Applause.) At bases around our country and around the world, I have had the privilege of meeting with those who defend our country and sacrifice for our freedom. I've seen their great decency, their unselfish courage. And I can assure you, ladies and gentlemen, the cause of freedom is in good hands. (Applause.)And we must make sure those who wear our uniform have the best training, the best pay and the best equipment. (Applause.) That's why last September I proposed supplemental funding to support our military in its mission. This legislation provided funding for body armor and vital equipment, for hazard pay, for health benefits, for ammunition, for fuel, for spare parts. In the Senate, only a small, out of the mainstream minority voted against that legislation. Two of those 12 senators are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Senator Kerry tried to explain his vote by saying, ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it."" (Laughter.) That sure clears things up. (Laughter.) Now he's offering a different explanation. Last week, Senator Kerry said he's proud that he and his running mate voted against funding for the troops. Later he said his vote against funding for our troops in Iraq and Afghanistan was a complicated matter. (Laughter.) There's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat. (Applause.)Over the next four years as the Commander-in-Chief, I will see to it our troops have the best possible pay, equipment and training. (Applause.) America is leading this world with confidence and moral clarity. We've got a lot of fine folks helping us, too. There's over 60 nations involved in the Proliferation Security Initiative. Nearly 40 nations are involved in Afghanistan. Some 30 nations are involved in Iraq. I'll continue to work with allies such as Tony Blair and Silvio Berlusconi and -- (applause) -- Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan, to work together to protect our peoples and to spread freedom and democracy. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other nations. (Applause.)This nation is prosperous and strong, yet, we need to remember that our greatest strength is in the character of our citizens. Earlier this month, my opponent said that a bunch of entertainers from Hollywood conveyed the heart and soul of America.THE AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I believe the heart and soul of America is found in places like St. Charles, Missouri. (Applause.)Our nation is strong because of the values we try to live by: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. We are strong because of the institutions that help give us direction and purpose -- our families and our schools and our religious congregations. (Applause.) These values and institutions are fundamental to our lives. They deserve the respect of our government. We stand for high standards in our public schools. We stand for local control of schools. We stand for strong accountability in schools, so no child is left behind in America. (Applause.)We stand for welfare reforms that require work and strengthen marriage, which have helped millions of Americans find independence and dignity. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person counts and everybody matters. (Applause.) We stand for institutions like marriage and family. (Applause.) We stand for judges who strictly and faithfully interpret the law, instead of legislating from the bench. (Applause.) We are building a culture of responsibility in America. We're changing the culture of America from one that has said, if it feels good do it, and if you've got a problem, blame somebody else -- to a culture in which each of us understands we are responsible for the decisions we make in life. (Applause.)If you are fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.) If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you are responsible for doing something about it. (Applause.) Like supporting your teachers. (Applause.) If you are a CEO in corporate America, you are responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.) And in a new responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourselves. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. You and I are living in a period where the stakes are high, the challenges are difficult, and a time when firm resolve is needed. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. It is a day that I will never forget. There were workers in hard-hats who shouted at me, ""Whatever it takes."" Either a fireman or a policeman grabbed me and said, ""Do not let me down."" As we all did that day, these men and women searching through the rubble took it personally. I took it personally. I have a responsibility that goes on. I will never relent in bringing justice to our enemies. I will defend our country, whatever it takes. (Applause.)In these times, I've also been a witness to the character of this nation. I've seen the unselfish courage of our troops; seen the heroism of Americans in the face of danger. I've seen the spirit of service and compassion renewed in our country. We've all seen our nation unite in common purpose when it mattered most. We will need all these qualities for the work ahead. We have a war to win, and the world is counting on us to lead the cause of freedom and peace. We have a duty to spread opportunity to every corner of our country. This is the work that history has set before us. We welcome it. And we know that for our blessed country, the best days lie ahead.God bless. Thanks for coming. (Applause.) Thank you, sir. Thank you all very much. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"    Thanks for coming. (Applause.) It's good to be back here in Waukesha. What a beautiful day. Listen, I was talking to Tommy and I said, you know, I need to get back to Wisconsin. He said, you sure do. I said, do you know your way around there? (Laughter.) So he and I have gotten on this modest little bus here. (Laughter.) And we're going to travel your beautiful state.  (Applause.)I'm here asking for the vote. (Applause.) I've come back to this important state to say to the people of Wisconsin, I know what I need to do to lead this country. I know what I need to do to make the world more peaceful, America more hopeful. I know what I want to do to make America safer, stronger, and better. I'm here to ask for your help for four more years. (Applause.)And I couldn't have come with a better escort. You educated him well. (Laughter.) I picked a good man when I asked him to come to Washington to lead a very important agency. He is a superb leader. He's a great organizer. He's got a clear vision. He cares deeply about the people of Wisconsin and the United States of America. Tommy Thompson is doing a fabulous job on behalf of the American people. (Applause.)My only regret, and I'm sure it's yours, as well, is that Laura is not traveling with me. No, I know, most people are wise enough to say, why don't you just go ahead and stay at home and let her carry the burden. (Laughter.) I was a lucky man when she said yes. She's a great lady and a fabulous First Lady for America. (Applause.) She's campaigning somewhere else, but today I am fortunate that one of our college graduates, one of our daughters is traveling with me. I'm really proud to introduce Barbara Bush. (Applause.) Made it out of college in four years. (Laughter.)I know Sue Ann Thompson is with us, and so is Tommy -- Tommy's daughter. I appreciate the Thompson family, as well, for enabling Tommy to serve the country so well. Listen, being in public life isn't easy on the families, and Tommy has got a great family. And I appreciate their supporting him so well. (Applause.)I appreciate Cheryl Sensenbrenner representing her husband, Jim. The Chairman is doing a fine job. He's a good congressman. (Applause.) I enjoy working with him. I know you're going to send him back, and I know you're going to send me back, so we'll be working together for four more years. (Applause.)I want to thank my friend, state Senator Mary Panzer, the Majority Leader of the statehouse, the state Senate, for being here today. Thanks for coming, Mary. Mary Lazich, as well, who's the state Senator. Thanks for the members of the Senate and the House and all the local officials who are here to say hello. Turn out the vote. (Applause.) Thanks for serving. But join these grassroots activists in finding people to register and tell them they've got a duty as an American to show up and vote on election day. And when you get them steered toward the polls, give them a little nudge in our direction. (Laughter.) They're going to like the message; it's hopeful, it's optimistic, it's positive about the future of this great country. (Applause.)I appreciate Jim Klauser and Mary Buestrin, all the people who have dedicated themselves to being involved in the political process. By the way, if you're interested in volunteering, we've gone high-tech -- georgewbush.com. It's an easy one to remember. (Laughter.) Why don't you just go ahead and log on and it will show you how you can help in the campaign. I'm serious. It's a -- I can't win this without you. I can't win -- and when you're talking to the voters, remind them that over the last three years, we have faced serious challenges, and this administration has given serious answers. (Applause.)You might remind the voters that when we came to office, the stock market was in decline and the economy was headed into recession. We acted. We delivered historic tax relief. And over the past three years, America has had the fastest growing economy of any major industrialized nation. (Applause.)When we arrived in Washington, D.C., when the great Vice President Dick Cheney and I arrived in Washington, D.C. -- (applause) -- the military was underfunded, and it was underappreciated. You might remember back to those times. So we gave our Armed Forces the resources and respect they deserve. And today, no one can question the skill and the strength and the spirit of the United States military. (Applause.)We saw war and grief arrive on a quiet September morning. We pursued the terrorist enemy across the world. We've captured or killed many of the key leaders of the al Qaeda network. We will stay on the hunt until justice is served and America is safe. (Applause.) We confronted the dangers of state-sponsored terror and the spread of weapons of mass destruction. We acted against two of the most violent and dangerous regimes on Earth. We liberated over 50 million people. Once again, America is proud to lead the armies of liberation. (Applause.)These accomplishments are important to the security and prosperity of America. They should say to the American people, I understand it is my job to confront problems, not to pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. (Applause.) It's the President's job to make the tough decisions and to keep his commitments. And that is how I will continue to lead this country for four more years. (Applause.)I'm working hard because this is going to be a tough campaign -- I know it -- and you know it. We take nothing for granted. We got a lot of work to do. I've got to take my message out to the people. I've got to rally the volunteers, such as yourselves, to go to work. I'm looking forward to it. My opponent is a -- is a highly experienced United States Senator. He's been in Washington --AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He's been in Washington a lot longer than I've been in Washington. He's been there so long, he's taken about both sides of just about every issue. (Applause.) He voted for Patriot Act, he voted for NAFTA, he voted for the No Child Left Behind Act, and he voted for the use of force in Iraq. Now -- (laughter) -- he opposes the Patriot Act, and NAFTA, and the No Child Left Behind Act, and the liberation of Iraq. If you disagree with John Kerry on most any issue, you may just have caught him on the wrong day. (Laughter and applause.)He came out here to -- to the Midwest, and he said he was the candidate with the conservative values.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: I know, I know, I know. (Laughter.) I'm just quoting what he said. (Laughter.) It's hard to square that when he said, I'm liberal and proud of it. Now he has a running mate. Senator Kerry is rated as the most liberal member of the United States Senate. And he chose a fellow lawyer who is the fourth most liberal member of the United States Senate. Now, in Massachusetts, that's what they call balancing the ticket. (Laughter and applause.)Great events will turn on this election. The person who sits in the Oval Office will set the course of the war on terror, and set the course, the direction of our economy. I'm here to ask for the vote because I have a clear vision and a strategy to win the war on terror and to extend peace and freedom throughout the world. I'm here asking for your vote -- (applause.) I'm here in this vital state asking for the vote because I have a plan to continue to create jobs, and therefore, opportunity throughout our entire country. I'm here to ask for the vote because I have a plan to rally -- to continue to rally the compassionate spirit of the American people so every single citizen has a chance to realize the great promise of our country. When you give me four more years, America will be safer, America will be stronger, and America will be a better country. (Applause.)A big issue for every family, and a big issue in this campaign, is the federal tax burden -- it's a big issue. By providing the largest tax relief since Ronald Reagan was the President, we have left more money in the hands that earned it. By spending and investing and to helping create jobs, the American people have used their money far better than the government could have. (Applause.)Today I met Scott and Shelly Mueller and their children. They're from New Berlin. They've got four kids. The tax relief that we passed -- and we raised the child credit and reduced the marriage penalty and created a 10-percent bracket, and reduced all rates -- our view is if anybody pays taxes, all people ought to -- if we have tax relief, everybody ought to get tax relief. That's what we thought. That's the fair way to do things. (Applause.) Well, the Muellers saved $2,700 on their taxes in '03. They'll save the same this year. And the reason I bring them up is oftentimes in Washington, they speak in terms of billions of this, and billions of that, and we tend to forget what tax relief means for the families of America, what it means for the individuals. The $2,700 for the Muellers means a lot.Here's what Shelly said. She said, ""We used that money for home improvement projects."" See, it's their home and they're trying to improve their home. That's a positive development. She said, ""We just couldn't afford these investment projects on our monthly budget. This is something we're counting on.""Tax relief matters to the people of this country. Oh, some of the sophisticates will say that $2,700 doesn't matter to the Muellers, it doesn't sound like a lot to me. It's a lot to them. That's what counts. And when they have more money in their pocket, the economy benefits. (Applause.)When people fully understand what they did, they'll understand a big component of the tax relief was to encourage the growth of our small businesses in America. See, 70 percent of new jobs are created by small businesses. Therefore, the tax relief must address the needs of the small business owners. Today I met Kyle Stoehr. He's got a manufacturing company. His business is strong -- at least that's what he told me, and I take him for his word for it. He said he hired seven new workers. See, that's what's happening all across the country. Small business after small business after small business is gaining confidence about the future, and they're putting people on the payroll. He's planning to invest $400,000 in software and machinery. Because of the tax relief, he's going to save $65,000 this year. See, that tax relief matters to small business owners. (Applause.) It's helping the small businesses of the United States of America. (Applause.)Steve Ziegler, he's the President of the InPro Corporation. He's a small business owner. He makes architectural projects -- products. He hired eight workers this year. He's planning on investing money; the tax relief has encouraged him to invest money. The reason I bring up these small business owners is because it's not government that create wealth; it's the small business owners that are expanding, that are creating the opportunity for Americans from all walks of life. (Applause.)I don't know if you know this or not, but there are thousands of small businesses which pay tax at the individual income tax rate level. See, if you're a sub-chapter S corporation, or a sole proprietorship, like most small businesses, you pay tax at the individual income tax levels. And so when you hear them talking in Washington about running up those taxes, kind of taxing the rich, really what you need to be hearing is they're going to tax small business owners. And that would be bad for this economy. Now is not the time to be raising taxes on small businesses or on working people in America. Now is the time to make sure we got permanency in the tax code. Now is the time to make sure we don't ruin this economic growth by running up the taxes on the American people. (Applause.)Tax relief is working. It's working. Since last summer our economy has been growing at its fastest rate in nearly 20 years. (Applause.) As Tommy said, since last August we've added 1.5 million new jobs. People are going back to work. Here in Wisconsin, the unemployment rate has dropped to 5.1 percent. (Applause.) Homeownership rate is at an all-time high. That's a fantastic statistic, isn't it? We want more people owning their own home. When you own something you have a vital stake in the future of the United States of America.Interest rates are low; business investment is growing; consumer confidence is at a two-year high; personal incomes are up. The economic stimulus plan that we worked with Congress on is paying off. This economy is strong and it is getting stronger. (Applause.)And there's a different view, of course. That's what campaigns are all about. My opponents looked at this progress and somehow concluded the sky is falling. It doesn't matter whether the message is delivered with a frown or a smile, it's the same old pessimism, same old pessimism. And they're going to cheer us up with higher taxes -- (laughter) -- more federal spending, and economic isolationism. The good news is, we're not going to let them do that. (Applause.) We're going to keep taxes low to make sure people can find work and people to be able to realize their dream.We're going to continue to bring fiscal discipline to Washington, D.C. See, it starts with understanding that we're not spending the government's money, we're spending your money. And we must be good stewards with your money in the Nation's Capital. (Applause.)I hear it all the time that small business owners are very worried about some things, and so am I. We got to solve these problems to make sure people can find work. I want this economy not only to be strong today, I want it to be strong 10 years from now. I want this to be the best place in the world to do business so people can find good, high-paying jobs.We've got to do something about these frivolous lawsuits. You cannot be pro-small business and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent has made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. (Laughter.) I made my choice; I will continue to push Congress to reform the laws of America to end these frivolous and junk lawsuits that make it hard for small businesses to grow their businesses. (Applause.)Tommy mentioned we've got a plan for better and affordable health care for the American people and for the small business owners of America -- that includes association health plans and tax-free health savings accounts. Now, I agree with Tommy. In order to make sure you got good doctors here in Wisconsin practicing their healing, in order to make sure health care is affordable, we need medical liability reform. We need the federal government to make sure that people can have their day in court, but we've got to stop these lawsuits that are driving docs out of business. (Applause.) It's in your interest. It's in the people's interest that we get this done.Listen, in order to make sure this economy is a place where people can find work, we need an energy plan. I submitted one to the United States Congress. They need to pass that to my desk. It calls for modernizing the electricity system. It calls for the use of alternative sources of energy. It encourages conservation. But we can explore for energy in environmentally friendly ways. For the sake of economic security, for the sake of national security, we must be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)I know we've got some farmers here. Listen, our farm economy is strong, and I intend to keep it that way. That's a good sign for states like Wisconsin. The farming families of this state are making a good living, and one of the reasons why is because they're selling Wisconsin products overseas. If you're good at something, we want people buying it. We're real good at growing things, we're very good at making things. I'm a person who believes that we ought to be opening up markets, not closing markets. Just listen, my view is, give our workers and farmers and entrepreneurs a chance to compete, and we can compete with anybody, anywhere, any time. (Applause.)There's a clear difference in this campaign on how to make sure -- how to make sure this is a good place for people to find work. If you reelect me, I'll continue to pursue a pro-growth, pro-entrepreneur, pro-farmer, pro-small business agenda, and America will be better off for it. (Applause.)Our future also depends on our willingness to lead in this world. The momentum of freedom in our time is strong. But we still face serious dangers. Al Qaeda is wounded, but not broken. Terrorists continue to attack in Afghanistan and Iraq. Regimes in North Korea and Iran are challenging the peace. If America shows weakness and uncertainty in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: After the attacks of September the 11th, I resolved, and this nation resolved, to bring justice to the terrorists, no matter where they dwell. We resolved to hold regimes that hide and sponsor terrorists to account. We made that resolution. And when you say something, you better mean it. In order for the world to be peaceful, when you say something, you better mean it. And I meant what we said. Afghanistan was a terrorist state. It was a training camp for al Qaeda killers. Because we acted, Afghanistan is a rising democracy; Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror; and many young girls now go to school for the first time. (Applause.)Iraq, only last year, was controlled by a dictator who threatened the civilized world. It's important for our fellow citizens to remember he used weapons of mass destruction against his own people. For decades, he has tormented and tortured the people of his country. Because we acted, Iraq today is a free and sovereign nation. Because we acted, its dictator now sits in a prison cell and will receive the justice he denied to so many for so long. (Applause.)September the 11th, 2001 taught us a lesson we must never forget. It's a lesson I'll never forget. And it's this: America must confront threats before they fully materialize, before it's too late. That's the lesson that we must never forget as a nation. And so, remembering that, and remembering the past of the dictator, we looked at the intelligence and we saw a threat. Now, the United States Congress, including members of both political parties, looked at the same intelligence and they saw a threat. The United Nations Security Council looked at the intelligence and it saw a threat.I went to the United Nations and said, for years, you've passed resolutions, and for years the dictator in Iraq has ignored the resolutions. I said, why don't we work together to pass a resolution, and this time, mean what we say. See, they had seen the threat. So, on a 15-nothing vote, the U.N. Security Council demanded a full accounting of Saddam Hussein's weapons programs, or face serious consequences. And as he had for over a decade, the dictator deceived the world. The dictator chose defiance. It was his choice to make. He refused to comply. So I had a choice to make: Ignore the lessons of September the 11th and hope for the best, trust the word of a madman, or defend America. Given that choice, I will defend our country every time. (Applause.)Although we haven't found the stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction, we were right to go into Iraq, and America is safer today because we did. We removed -- (applause) -- we removed a declared enemy of America who had the capability of producing weapons of mass destruction. He had that capability. And he could have passed that capability to terrorists bent on acquiring them. After September the 11th, that was a risk we could not afford to take.And we've got hard work to do there, and important work to do there. Our immediate task around the world and in Iraq and Afghanistan is to bring those terrorists to justice. See, you can't talk sense to them. You can't negotiate with terrorists. You can't sit back and hope that somehow therapy will work and they will change their ways. (Laughter.) That's just not the way it is. We must engage the enemies in Afghanistan and Iraq and around the world so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.)We know these terrorists want to strike us again because they want to disrupt our way of life and spread fear. That's what they want to do. So we're doing everything we can to protect the homeland. You just need to know there are a lot of really decent, hardworking people that are spending hours on our mutual behalf to do everything we can to disrupt a potential attack. We're sharing intelligence like never before. We're running down every lead. And I know I speak for everybody when I thank the police and the firefighters and the emergency teams from the great state of Wisconsin who are serving as great first responders. (Applause.)We will stay on the offense. We'll protect our homeland. Yet, in the long run, our safety requires something more. We must work to change the conditions that give rise to terror in the Middle East: the poverty and the hopelessness and the resentment that the terrorists can exploit. Life in that region is going to be far more hopeful and more peaceful when men and women choose their own leaders. It will be a much better place, a much more hopeful place when the people get to decide their own fate.You see, by serving the ideal of liberty, we are bringing hope to others, and that makes America more secure. By serving the ideal of liberty, we serve the deepest ideals of our own country -- because, you see, we understand that freedom is not America's gift to the world; freedom is the Almighty God's gift to every man and woman in this world. (Applause.)The world is changing for the better because of American leadership. Three years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of al Qaeda. Now, the terror camps are closed, democracy is rising, and the American people are safer. Three years ago, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists on missions of murder. Now, we're working with the Pakistani government to find those killers in remote regions of that country, and America is safer. Three years ago, Saudi -- in Saudi Arabia, terrorists were -- were not challenged by that government. Today we're working with the Saudi government, and the Saudi government is running down al Qaeda leadership, and America is safer. (Applause.) Three years ago, three years ago, Libya was spending millions of dollars to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Now, thousands of Libyan chemical munitions have been destroyed. Libya has given up its nuclear processing equipment, and America is safer. (Applause.)No, the world is changing for the better. Three years ago, the dictator in Iraq was a threat. He was a threat to us, he was a threat to the free world, he was a threat to the people in the neighborhood, and he was a threat to his own people. That dictator is no longer a threat, and the American people are safer. (Applause.)I need four more years to complete the work. There's more to do to make America a safer place. There's more work to do to make the world a more peaceful place. We will finish the work of democracy in Afghanistan and Iraq. (Applause.)Listen, the good leaders have stepped up there, people who believe in the aspirations of their people. And we will support them. And the good people in those countries are taking more responsibility for their own security. They want to live in freedom. Their moms and dads want their children to be able to grow up in a peaceful and free society. They can count on us. That's what they need to hear. They need to hear from America they can count on the American people. You see, when we give our word, we keep our word. (Applause.)I see people who proudly wear our uniform here, and I want to thank you for your service. (Applause.) At bases across our country and the world, I've had the privilege of meeting with those who defend our country and sacrifice for our country. I had the high honor of meeting those family members whose son or daughter paid the ultimate sacrifice. The best way to honor their bravery is to complete the mission and make sure America is safer and the world is more free. (Applause.)Anytime we put our troops in harm's way, they deserve the best training, the best pay, the best possible support. That's why, last September, I proposed what we call a supplemental funding request to support our military in its mission. That's more money for the troops, money that would help pay for body armor, or vital equipment, or hazard pay, or health benefits, ammunition, fuel, spare parts. It was money to support them.In the Senate, only a small, out-of-mainstream minority voted against the legislation. Two of those 12 senators are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: Now, when Senator Kerry tried to explain his vote, here's what he said. He said, ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion -- before I voted against it."" (Laughter.) End quote. It sure doesn't clear it up, does it? (Laughter.) Now he's offering a different explanation. Earlier this week, he said he is proud he and his running mate voted against the funding for our troops.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: No, he's entitled to his view, but here's mine: Members of Congress should not vote to send troops into battle and then vote against funding them. (Applause.) As the Commander-in-Chief of this great military, I will see to it they have what is needed to complete their mission. (Applause.)We are leading the world with confidence and moral clarity. And we're calling on other nations to help us. There are over 60 nations involved in the Proliferation Security Initiative, nearly 40 nations in Afghanistan, over 30 nations in Iraq -- countries committed to the same thing we're committed to, our own security through spreading democracy, and peace, and freedom. Over the next four years, I will continue to build coalitions to make the world a peaceful place. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other foreign countries. (Applause.)This nation is prosperous and strong, yet, we need to remember that our greatest strength is in the character of our citizens. The true strength of America lies in the hearts and souls of our fellow citizens. The other day my opponent said that a bunch of entertainers from Hollywood conveyed the heart and soul of America.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: No, I believe the heart and soul of America is found in places in Wisconsin. (Applause.) In places just like Waukesha. (Applause.) Our nation is strong because of the values we try to live by: courage, compassion, reference and integrity. We're strong because of the institutions that help give us direction and purpose: our families, our schools, our religious congregations. (Applause.) These values and institutions are fundamental to our lives, and they deserve the respect of our government.We stand for high standards in our public schools. We stand for local control of our public schools. We stand for accountability in our public schools, so no child is left behind in America. (Applause.) We stand for welfare reforms that require work and strengthen marriage, which have helped millions of Americans find independence and dignity in their lives. We stand for institutions like marriage and family, which are the foundations of society. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters. We stand for judges who strictly and faithfully interpret the law, instead of legislating from the bench. (Applause.) We stand for the fair treatment of faith-based groups so they can receive federal support for their works of compassion and healing. (Applause.)We stand for a culture of responsibility. The culture of this country is changing from one that has said, if it feels good, do it, and if you've got a problem, blame somebody else -- to a culture in which each of us understands we're responsible for the decisions we make in life. If you are fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. (Applause.) If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.) And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourself. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in a life of a nation when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. You and I are living in a period where the stakes are high, the challenges are difficult, a time when firm resolve is needed.None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. I'm never going to forget that moment. There were workers in hard-hats yelling at me, ""Whatever it takes."" I remember looking in the eyes of either a policeman or firefighter, and he said, ""Do not let me down.""Like -- as we all did that day -- (applause) -- as we all did that day, these men and women searching through the rubble took it personally. I took it personally. I have a responsibility that goes on. I will never relent in bringing justice to our enemies. I will defend the security of the American people, whatever it takes. (Applause.)I've also been witness to the great character of this country. I've seen the unselfish courage of our troops. I've seen the heroism of Americans in the face of danger. I've seen the spirit of service and compassion renewed in our country. And we've all seen our nation unite in common purpose when it mattered most. We will need all these qualities for the work ahead. We have a war to win, and the world is counting on us to lead the cause of freedom and peace. We have a duty to spread opportunity to every part of America. This is the work that history has set before us. We welcome it. And we know that for our blessed country, the best days lie ahead.Thanks for coming. God bless. May God bless you all. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
bush,2008,"    Thank you all. (Applause.) I'm honored you're here. We've had a fantastic day in the great state of Pennsylvania. (Applause.) See my little bus there? We've been traveling the back roads of this great state. It's so beautiful. All kinds of people came out to say hello. And what a great place to end a great  trip, in York, Pennsylvania. Thanks for coming. (Applause.)You probably know this, but for nine months in 1777 and 1778, York was the capital of the United States. (Applause.) Today, York is the capital of Bush-Cheney country. (Applause.)I want to thank all my fellow Republicans, I want to thank the discerning Democrats and wise independents who are here today. (Applause.) I'm proud you're here. I'm here to let you know that I have the desire, the drive and the vision to lead this nation for four more years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: I'm back in this important state to ask for the vote. (Applause.) And I'm here in this crowd to ask for your help. Register your friends and neighbors. Work those phones, put up the signs. If you want to help, go on to GeorgeWBush.com on the Internet. You can find out how to sign up to help. I'm counting on you. And together we will win a great victory in Pennsylvania, and a great victory across this nation on November the 2nd. (Applause.)You know how many people running for President would love to have Joe Paterno introduce him in Pennsylvania? (Applause.) Everybody who has ever run for President wants Joe Paterno to introduce him. (Laughter.) But in the year 2004, there's only one. (Applause.) And I'm honored it's me. (Applause.) I want to thank you, Joe. Thank you very much for being here. I'm proud of the example you set. You're a fine, fine, fine American. And you raised a fine son in Scott. We need to send him to the United States Congress -- Scott Paterno. (Applause.)I regret that Laura is not here. I'm going to give you all kinds of reasons to send me back to Washington today, but probably the most important one is so that Laura is the First Lady for four more years. (Applause.) I'm really proud of her. She's a fantastic, fantastic woman. I love her dearly. We talked to her on the phone on the bus -- she sent her best. And in her stead, traveling with me today is a new graduate from the University of Texas, one of my great daughters, Jenna Bush. (Applause.) Made it through in four years, I want you to know.Proud to be here on stage and traveling today with a fine United States Senator, Senator Rick Santorum. (Applause.) What a fine job Congressman Todd Platts is doing for the people of this area. (Applause.) Where's your mother? There's mom, right there. She made me some fudge. (Laughter.) I'm going to run all day -- well, I'm going to bike all day tomorrow. (Laughter.) Thanks for the fudge, I actually had some.I appreciate Jerry Pappert, the Attorney General from the great state of Pennsylvania, who joined us today. Thanks for coming, General. (Applause.) State Senator Jeff Piccola is with us. I know other members of the statehouse are here. Thank you all for coming. I'm proud you're here. Turn out the vote. Make sure you spend enough time in your district to get the vote out.I want to thank state Senator Charlie Dent. He's running for the Congress up the road here. He's going to make a fine United States congressman. Charlie, thanks for coming. (Applause.) I know we've got other candidates here, and I want to thank you for running. I appreciate my friend, Alan Novak, the Chairman of the Pennsylvania Republican Party. He's representing the grassroots activists who are here.A grassroots activist is somebody who is getting ready to turn out the vote. And for those of you who are going to do that, thanks a lot. It really means a lot. It's important. The stakes are high in this election. Just like you're counting on me, I'm counting on you. (Applause.)I love the Oak Ridge Boys. (Applause.) Every time I see them, they say, we're your friend, you can count on us. And sure enough, every time I've counted on them they have been there. I am honored to have you here. (Applause.) Thanks for coming.I want to thank the Matt Goss Band, as well. Thank you for coming. (Applause.) Ethel Berdall (phonetic) is with us. She is 101 years young. (Applause.) Hi, Ethel. I'm proud to have your support. (Applause.) Thanks for coming.The last three and a half years have brought serious challenges. We have given serious answers. We came to office with a stock market in decline and an economy heading into a recession. But we acted. We led. We delivered historic tax relief, and over the past three years, America has had the fastest growing economy in the industrialized world. (Applause.)There were corporate crimes in America recently, people who forgot what it means to a responsible citizen. We acted. We passed tough corporate reforms. We're bringing wrongdoers to account. It is now clear that we will not tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of America. (Applause.)We saw war and grief arrive on a quiet September morning. We acted. I have led. We pursued the terrorist enemy across the world. We have captured or killed many key leaders of the al-Qaida network. We will stay -- (applause.) We will stay on the hunt until justice is served and America is safe from attack. (Applause.)We confronted the dangers of state-sponsored terror, and the spread of weapons of mass destruction. We acted against two of the most violent and dangerous regimes on Earth. We have liberated over 50 million people. (Applause.) America is safer because of our actions. The world is better off; America is once again proud to lead the armies of liberation. (Applause.)When the Vice President -- and oh, am I running with a fine man in Dick Cheney -- (applause) -- when he and I came to Washington, the military -- remember back three-and-a-half years ago -- the military was underfunded and underappreciated. We gave our Armed Forces the resources and respect they deserve. (Applause.) And today, no friend or foe can question the skill, the strength, and the spirit of the United States military. (Applause.)It is the President's job -- it is the President's job to confront problems, not to pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. (Applause.) It is the President's job to make hard decisions, to keep his commitments. That is how I have led our country, and that is how I will continue to lead our country for four more years. (Applause.)I'm ready for the contest. I'm ready for the contest. (Applause.) I'm looking forward to it. It's going to be a tough race, make no mistake about it. That's why I'm traveling stop to stop on this great bus. I take nothing for granted. After all, I'm running against an experienced United States Senator from Massachusetts.AUDIENCE: Booo!THE PRESIDENT: He's been there a long, long time. He's been there long enough to take both sides on just about every issue. (Applause.) He voted for the Patriot Act, for NAFTA, for the No Child Left Behind Act, and for the use of force in Iraq. Now he opposes the Patriot Act, NAFTA, the No Child Left Behind Act, and the liberation of Iraq. If you disagree with the Senator from Massachusetts on most any issue, you may just have caught him on the wrong day. (Laughter.)And now, just last weekend, he even tried to claim he was the candidate with conservative values. (Laughter.) I know -- I know, but I'm quoting his own words. Believe it or not, that's what he said. (Laughter.) It's hard to square that statement with his previous statement when he said, ""I'm a liberal and proud of it."" On issue after issue, from funding our troops who are on the battlefield, to involving parents in important decisions of their minor daughters, to supporting faith-based and community organizations that are helping those in need, the Senator is out of step with the mainstream values that are so important to our country. (Applause.)My opponent now has a running mate. I look forward to a spirited debate. Senator Kerry is rated as the most liberal member of the Senate, and he chose a fellow lawyer who is the fourth most liberal member of the Senate. Back in Massachusetts, that's what they call balancing the ticket. (Laughter.)Great events will turn on this election. The person who sits in the Oval Office will set the course of the war on terror, and the direction of our economy. I have a clear vision to win the war on terror, and to extend peace and freedom throughout the world. I'm asking for your vote because I have a plan and a strategy to create more jobs, so every single citizen has a chance to realize the great promise of America. I'm seeking the vote to rally the compassionate spirit of this country so every citizen can realize their full, God-given potential. (Applause.) I will be clear on where I stand and I'll be certain about where I'm going to take this nation. (Applause.) When America gives me four more years, America will be safer, stronger, and better. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: A big issue for every family in America is the tax burden. By providing the largest federal tax relief since Ronald Reagan was the President -- (applause) -- we have left more money in the hands that earned it. (Applause.) By spending and investing and helping create new jobs, the American people have used their money far better than the federal government could have. (Applause.)Our economy is strong and it is growing stronger. (Applause.) Since last summer, our economy is outpacing the entire world by growing at its fastest rate in nearly 20 years. (Applause.) In less than a year's time, we've added more than 1.5 million new jobs. (Applause.) In this state, in the great state of Pennsylvania, you've added 44,000 new jobs since February. (Applause.) The unemployment rate in this state is at 5.1 percent, below the national average. (Applause.)Across the country, the manufacturing sector is growing stronger. Homeownership rate is at an all-time high. (Applause.) Interest rates are low; business investment is growing; consumer confidence is at a two-year high; personal incomes are on the rise. The economy is moving into high gear. The tax relief we passed is working. (Applause.)My opponents look at all this progress and somehow conclude the sky is falling. But whether their mission is -- whether their message is delivered with a frown or a smile, it's the same old pessimism. And to cheer us up, they propose higher taxes, more federal spending, and economic isolationism. That's the surest way to end economic growth and to put Americans out of work. This nation is on the path of progress, and we're not turning back. (Applause.)To sustain economic growth, we need to keep your taxes low. (Applause.) Higher taxes right now would undermine growth and destroy jobs. To help grow the American economy and create more jobs for American workers, I have a better idea. Congress needs to make the tax relief permanent, and not raise taxes on the American people. (Applause.)To make sure this economy continues to grow we've got to be wise about how we spend the money you send to Washington. That's why we need discipline -- spending discipline -- in Washington, D.C. (Applause.) And spending discipline starts with understanding whose money we spend. We're not spending the governor's -- government's money in Washington, D.C., we're spending the people's money in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)I not only want us to grow next year, but I want us to keep growing in the out-years. So I've got a plan to do so. First, we've got to stop these frivolous and junk lawsuits. (Applause.) You cannot be pro-small business and pro-trial lawyer at the same time. (Applause.) You have to choose. My opponent has made his choice, and he put him on the ticket. (Applause.) I have made my choice. I will continue to push Congress to reform tort laws and end frivolous and junk lawsuits. (Applause.)And that includes medical liability reform. (Applause.) Small businesses make it difficult -- it's very difficult for small businesses to hire new people, because their health care premiums are going up. And one of the reasons why is because there's too many junk lawsuits suing the docs around this country and in this state. (Applause.)We need energy legislation, common-sense energy legislation if we want our economy to continue to grow. A couple of years ago, I submitted a plan to the United States Congress that encourages conservation, that modernizes our electricity grid, but also says that we need to use the resources we have at hand in environmentally-friendly ways. We need to be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)We need to be opening up markets for Pennsylvania entrepreneurs and farmers and ranchers. Listen, I know we've got some farmers here. (Applause.) You're making a good living these days, and one of the reasons why is because we're selling Pennsylvania farm products all around the world. (Applause.) We need to be opening up markets. Our market is open; let's get other countries to open up theirs. Give us a level playing field, and America can compete with anybody, anyplace, anywhere, anytime. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: Angry talk, and class warfare rhetoric, and economic isolationism won't get anybody hired. That's not a plan for the future. The best way to make sure our people find work and keep work is to reelect a pro-growth, pro-entrepreneur, pro-small business, pro-farmer President, George W. Bush. (Applause.)America's future also depends on our willingness to lead in the world. The momentum of freedom in our time is strong, but we still face serious dangers. Al Qaeda is wounded but not broken. (Applause.) Terrorists continue to attack in Afghanistan and Iraq. Regimes in North Korea and Iran are challenging the peace. If America shows weakness or uncertainty in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This will not happen on my watch. (Applause.)As in other times, many Americans are serving and sacrificing to keep this country safe and to bring freedom to others. And we thank them for their sacrifice. We mourn the dead and vow never to forget their sacrifice. (Applause.) I thank the families, the wives and the husbands, the moms and the dads, and the sons and daughters of those whose loved one is overseas serving our nation. We stand with your loved one. America honors their service. (Applause.)They serve because after the attacks of September the 11th, 2001, this nation resolved to fight the terrorists where they dwell. We resolved to hold regimes that hide and sponsor terrorists to account. Afghanistan was a terror state, provided safe haven for al Qaeda. They trained and plotted and planned there. Because we acted, America is more secure, the training camps no longer exist, Afghanistan is a rising democracy. Young girls go to school for the first time in their lives. And they're an ally -- Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. (Applause.)Iraq only last year was controlled by a dictator who threatened the civilized world. He had used weapons of mass destruction on his own people. For decades he tortured and tormented the people of Iraq. We must never forget the mass graves of the thousands he murdered. Because we acted, America is more secure. Because we acted, Iraq is free and a sovereign nation. (Applause.) And because we acted, the dictator is now in a prison cell and will receive the justice he denied so many for so long. (Applause.)We must never forget the lessons of September the 11th. It's a lesson -- there are many lessons, but I want to share one with you that we -- I will never forget, and I hope this country never does: America must confront threats before they fully materialize. (Applause.) When we see a threat, we just can't hope for the best anymore. That's the lesson of September the 11th. And we must never forget the lesson. My administration looked at intelligence, and we remembered the past of Saddam. We remembered he used weapons on his own people. And then we looked at further intelligence, and we saw a threat. The members of the United States Congress from both political parties looked at the very same intelligence, and they saw a threat. The United Nations -- the United Nations looked at the intelligence and it saw a threat.Remember I went to the United Nations. I said, for too long you have said the man is a threat and he has ignored you. And so we went to the United Nations and he -- and demanded a full accounting of Saddam Hussein's weapons programs. That's what the United Nations said. And as he had for over a decade, he ignored the ultimatums of the free world. He said, your resolutions don't matter to me.I happen to believe that when you say something, you better mean it. (Applause.) Well, we said -- we, being the free world out of the United Nations Security Council -- said, disclose your weapons, disarm, or face serious consequences. That's what was said. And he denied, he deceived, he wasn't about to listen to the demands. So I had a choice to make. Either take the word of a madman, or defend America. Given that choice, I will defend America every time. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: Although we haven't found stockpiles of weapons, I believe we were right to go into Iraq. (Applause.) And America is safer today because we did. (Applause.) We removed a declared enemy of America who had the capability of producing weapons of mass destruction and could have passed that capability to terrorists bent on acquiring them. In the world after September the 11th, that was a risk we could not afford to take. (Applause.)We've got tough work to do. We've got hard work to do in Afghanistan and Iraq. Our immediate task in those countries is to capture or kill the terrorists and foreign fighters. (Applause.) Every terrorist we deal with abroad is one who will never do harm to an innocent American or anyone else. (Applause.) You can't talk sense to these people. You can't negotiate with these people. They're cold-blooded. They are -- they've hijacked a great religion. They're not religious people. You cannot sit back and hope for the best. We must engage these people in Afghanistan, Iraq, and around the world, so we do not have to face them here at home. (Applause.) And that's exactly what I will do during the next four years. (Applause.)My most solemn duty -- my most solemn duty is the security of American families. (Applause.) It's my solemn obligation. There is no such thing as perfect security. The threats to our homeland are real. We know the terrorists want to strike us again because they want to spread fear and disrupt our way of life. We've reorganized our government to protect the homeland. I put a good man in there to run that organization. (Applause.) You trained him well. Tom Ridge is doing a great job. (Applause.) A lot of people are working hard on our behalf, your behalf, a lot of good people.I want to thank the police and firefighters and emergency teams from York, Pennsylvania, for standing on the front lines of homeland security. (Applause.)We're defending our homeland, we will defeat the terrorists abroad. Yet, in the long run, our safety and the safety of our children and grandchildren requires something more. We must work to change the conditions that give rise to terror in the Middle East -- the poverty, the hopelessness, and the resentments that terrorists can exploit. Life in that region will be far more hopeful and peaceful when men and women can choose their leaders and the people can decide their own future.By serving the ideal of liberty, we are bringing hope to others, and that makes America more secure. (Applause.)By serving the ideal of liberty, we also serve the deepest ideals of our country. We know that freedom is not America's gift to the world; freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. (Applause.)Because we have taken this fight to the enemy, because freedom is rising in places they claim as their own, the terrorists are increasingly desperate. They know their cause is failing. They know that time is against them. And their only chance is to shake the resolve of America and Iraq and anyone else who loves freedom. So their actions have grown even more cruel and sadistic. They cover their faces in videos of their crimes. But those hoods cannot hide the face of evil. (Applause.) We've seen their kind before, in death camps and gulags. And as before, America will persevere, we will fear no evil, and we will prevail. (Applause.)Our men and women in the military are keeping America more secure. They're taking great risks on our behalf. At bases across the country and around the world, I have had the privilege, the high privilege, of meeting with those who defend our country and sacrifice for our security. I've seen their decency and their unselfish courage. And I assure you, ladies and gentlemen, the cause of freedom is in good hands. (Applause.)And when we put our soldiers in harm's way, they deserve the very best. They deserve the full commitment of the federal government. That's why I proposed supplemental funding to support our military in its mission. This legislation provided for body armor and vital equipment, for hazard pay, for health benefits, ammunition, fuel, and spare parts for the military. (Applause.)In the Senate, only a small, out-of-the-mainstream minority voted against the legislation -- and two of those 12 senators are my opponent and his running mate.AUDIENCE: Boooo!THE PRESIDENT: When asked to explain his vote, the Senator from Massachusetts said this: ""I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it."" End quote. That sure clears things up. (Laughter.) The American President must speak clearly and mean what he says. (Applause.)America is leading the world with confidence and moral clarity. We have a strong coalition of more than 30 countries in Iraq. I will continue to build on our alliances and to work with our friends for the cause of security and peace. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. (Applause.)This nation is prosperous and strong, yet we need to remember that our greatest strength is in the hearts and souls of our the American citizens. We're strong because of the values we try to live by -- courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. We're strong because of the institutions that help give us direction and purpose -- our families and our schools, our religious congregations. These values and institutions are fundamental to our lives. They deserve the respect of the government. (Applause.)We stand for good public schools by insisting on high standards, local control, and strong accountability measures. (Applause.) We stand for fair treatment of faith-based groups, so they can receive federal support for their works of compassion and healing. (Applause.) We stand for welfare reforms that require work and strengthen marriage, which have helped millions of Americans find independence and dignity. (Applause.) We stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every person counts. (Applause.) We stand for institutions like marriage and family, which are the foundations of our society. (Applause.) We stand for judges who strictly and faithfully interpret the law. (Applause.)We stand for a culture of responsibility in our country. The culture of America is changing from one that has said, if it feels good, do it, and if you've got a problem, blame somebody else, to a culture in which each of us understands we are responsible for the decisions we make in life. (Applause.) If you're fortunate enough to be a mother or a dad, you are responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for supporting the teachers and the schools. (Applause.) If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. (Applause.) And in this new responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourselves. (Applause.)For all Americans, these years in our history will always stand apart. There are quiet times in the life of a nation, when little is expected of its leaders. This isn't one of those times. You and I are living in a period when the stakes are high, and the challenges are difficult -- a time when resolve is needed. (Applause.)None of us will ever forget that week when one era ended and another began. On September the 14th, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers. I'll never forget that day. There were workers in hard-hats shouting at me, ""Whatever it takes!"" I remember looking in the eyes of those firefighters and policemen -- and a guy looked at me and said, ""Don't ever let me down."" (Applause.)As we all did that day, these men and women searching through the rubble took it personally. I took it personally. I have a responsibility that goes on. I will never relent in bringing justice to our enemies. I will defend the security of America, whatever it takes. (Applause.)In these times I've also been a witness to the character of this nation. I've seen the unselfish courage of our troops. I've seen the heroism of Americans in the face of danger. I've seen the spirit of service and compassion renewed in our country. We've all seen our nation unite in common purpose when it mattered most.We'll need all these qualities for the work ahead. We have a war to win, and the world is counting on us to lead the cause of freedom and peace. We have a duty to spread opportunity to every part of America. We will make America safer, stronger, and better. This is the work that history has set before us. We welcome it. And we know that for our blessed country, the best days lie ahead.God bless. Thank you all. (Applause.) "
