speech,year,candidate
"Well, first of all, let me just thank Dwight and Toni for your incredible hospitality. I hope you didn't cut down the tree just for this event. [Laughter] I'd feel a little guilty about that. It looks like it was a nice, big tree. [Laughter]It's wonderful to see all of you. I've got some friends in the room who I've known a very long time; some people who I'm meeting for the first time. But to all of you, I appreciate yourself extending yourselves in this way.What I want to do is keep my remarks at the top relatively brief, and then I want to spend some time just in a conversation with you and answering some questions and getting your feedback.We are at a point in our history, as Dwight indicated, that I think is as important, if not more important, than where we were back in 2008. I'm obviously a little grayer than I was then. I've got some bumps and bruises from some tough political battles in this town. But what we've been able to accomplish over the last 3 years I'm extraordinary proud of.We were able to prevent America from going into a great depression. We were able to, after a series of quarterly GDP reports that were the worst that we've seen since the Great Depression, reverse it and get the economy to grow again. We've seen 20 straight months of consecutive job growth. We were able to pass health insurance reform, Wall Street reform, end ""don't ask, don't tell,"" end the war in Iraq, the list goes on.And sometimes when Valerie and I come out of a meeting we have to remind ourselves of some of the stuff we've done because you lose track after 3 years. And so I'm very proud of our track record. But what is absolutely true is that huge swaths of the country are still hurting. A lot of people are still struggling out there. And there's no way in which America right now is fulfilling all of its potential.We've got entire communities that have been devastated by this recession. We have young people who are struggling to take advantage of the good educations that they've received but are having trouble finding work. And we've got a whole generation of kids out there who aren't getting the kind of education that they need to compete in the 21st century.And so as proud as I am of what we've already accomplished, I am that much more determined to make sure that over the next 5 years we complete the task that we set out, which was to create a Government that is responsive to not just people who are hurting now, but also responsive to future generations; that we're able to reduce our deficit in a responsible way, in a balanced way; that we're able to make sure our school system is working for every child and not just some children; that we implement health care reform so that we start reducing costs for families and for businesses and for the Federal Government, but also improve quality and make sure that nobody out there is going bankrupt just because somebody in their family is getting sick.We've got to still implement immigration reform--a big, unfinished piece of business--because we're a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants, and we should be able to reconcile those two imperatives and make sure that we've got a system that works to grow our economy and improve our economy and doesn't leave people in a second-class status in this United States of America.We still don't have an energy policy that is suitable for the needs of the future. And although we've made enormous progress, I think people forget, for example, that we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars and trucks just in the last year, which if it had been in legislative form would have probably been the most significant piece of environmental legislation in the last 30 years. A lot of people don't know it. And despite some of those gains, we still are way too dependent on imported oil, and we still haven't done everything we can to transition to a clean energy economy.In foreign policy, we're ending the war in Iraq and we're transitioning out of Afghanistan. But I didn't run for office only to end a war or only to make sure that we got bin Laden. We also want to make sure that we're creating opportunity all around the world, that we have a positive, proactive agenda that is helping alleviate poverty and helping to provide education and helping to make sure that the Arab Spring is one that turns positive and that gives more people opportunity.So across the board we've just got a lot more work to do. And the only way we're going to be able to accomplish it is if we've got folks like you as energized, as enthusiastic, as committed as so many of you were in 2008. Because what's holding us back right now are not technical questions. I mean, there are some big technical issues surrounding how do you spur on clean energy, how do we make sure that our manufacturing base is strong here in the United States, and we are at the cutting edge of those technologies that are going to help us win the race for the future.But those are solvable problems. The challenge we have right now is fixing our politics and making sure that we've got the kind of politics and governance here in Washington which is responsive to the needs of people, not the needs of special interests, that brings out the best in us and not the worst in us.And that is probably the biggest piece of business that remains unfinished. That's probably the area where we've been most stymied over the last 3 years. My legislative record, our administration record, I'll put up against any President in their first term. But in terms of changing the culture in Washington, the fever has not broken yet. Not everybody has gotten the word yet--[laughter]--that this is not how the American people want their Government to operate.They want common sense. They want responsiveness. They want a focus on the future and the long term. They want compromise where that's appropriate. But they also want to make sure that their leaders stand on principle where needed and are willing to make the tough calls and do the difficult things that will help us ensure that the America that we pass on to our kids and our grandkids is better than the one that we inherited.And that I think is the biggest challenge. And over the next year we are going to be wrestling with what are two fundamentally different visions of where we need to take the country and where we need to take our politics. And I'm confident that the American people prefer our vision. But we're going to have to communicate that effectively, and to do that, I'm going to need you.So I just--as I was thinking about riding over here, I was thinking about a group of veterans that I met with today. We made a big announcement about initiatives that are going to help veterans get hired. The unemployment rate for post-9/11 veterans is actually higher than the general population, and that's something that I intend to fix. But it reminded me of something that Michelle and I have both experienced.The biggest honor of my job is serving as Commander in Chief. And I get the chance to interact a lot with people who are based all around the world; Michelle interacts with military families here, throughout the country. The kind of sacrifices they're making on behalf of their country, the kind of commitment and discipline and putting country ahead of self-interest, is unbelievable.And for that same spirit to be captured and to be channeled and to be the animating spirit of Washington, that should be our goal. Because if we do that, there's no problem we can't solve. There's no challenge we can't meet. I am absolutely convinced of that.And so I've said before that this campaign probably won't be as sexy as the first one. It'll be tight. It'll be tough. But I also want to remind people who were on the first campaign, there's been a lot of revisionist history that says how perfect that first one was. [Laughter] It didn't feel like that when we were in the middle of it. [Laughter] And that's part of our democracy. It's always a little messy, and it's always tough. But it's also worth it when it's done right.And if you're willing to join me on this journey, I think at the end of the day you'll see that we're actually able to deliver the kind of change that you can believe in.So thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"Thank you! Thank you so much. Aloha. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Please, everybody, have a seat. It is good to be home. It is wonderful to see somebody who actually knew my parents when they first met at the University of Hawaii--the Governor of the great State of Hawaii, Neil Abercrombie, and his wonderful wife Nancie Caraway. Give them a big round of applause.Lieutenant Governor Brian Schatz is here; Congresswoman Mazie Hirono. Please give a big round of applause to outstanding singer John Cruz. I want to thank Jeff Stone and all of our host committee for helping to pull this together.It is wonderful to be here, not just because the weather is perfect, but this has been a little trip down memory lane. I've got classmates who are here. I actually have Mr. Torrey, my--was it seventh grade or eighth grade teacher? [Laughter] He looks great. Tenth grade--tenth grade--he looks exactly the same. [Laughter] I'm trying to figure out what he's eating. [Laughter]Now, somebody said--they were passing on greetings from a guy who went to Kamehameha who said he blocked my shot into the bleachers. [Laughter] I didn't appreciate that. [Laughter] And then somebody else said, this guy who says he went to kindergarten with you says hi. [Laughter] And I got to admit, I don't remember my kindergarten class. [Laughter] But tell him I said hello as well.It is great to be home, great to just feel that aloha spirit. And Michelle and the girls will be back shortly for Christmas vacation, as we do every year. We'll see if Washington gets its business done, so I can get here as well. But that's always a challenge.But I'm here today not just because I need your help, it's also because the country needs your help. There was a reason why so many of you worked so hard, poured your hearts into our campaign in 2008. And obviously, there was a little bias here in Honolulu and here in Hawaii about the hometown kid. But it certainly wasn't because you thought it was going to be easy to elect me President. As Neil said, there was some skepticism about the prospects of my candidacy. I don't think that you would have, if you were looking for an easy campaign, you would have decided to support Barack Hussein Obama for President. [Laughter] The polls did not tell you that I was a sure thing.And besides, the campaign wasn't about me. It was about a vision that we share for America. It wasn't a narrow, cramped vision of an America where everybody is left to fend for themselves. It was a vision of a big, generous, bold America, where we look out for one another. An America where everybody has a shot, that everybody, if they work hard, if they take care of their responsibilities, if they look after their family, that they can get their piece of the American Dream.That was what the campaign was about: the belief that the more Americans succeed, the more America succeeds. And that's the vision we shared, and that was the change that we believed in. We knew it wouldn't come easy, we knew it wasn't going to come quickly, but 3 years later, because of what you did in 2008, we've already started to see what change looks like.Let me give you some examples. Change is the first bill I signed into law, a law that says an equal day's work should mean an equal day's pay, because our daughters should deserve the same opportunities as our sons do. That's what change looks like.Change is the decision we made--not a popular one at the time--to save the auto industry from collapse. There were a lot of folks who said, let Detroit go bankrupt. But we decided to not only save thousands of jobs, get hundreds of local businesses thriving again, but we are now seeing fuel-efficient cars rolling off the assembly lines, stamped with three proud words: Made in America. And those are going to be exported all around the world. That's because of you, because of the change that you brought.Change is the decision we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our oil addiction and finally raise our fuel efficiency standards on our cars and on our trucks. And now, by the next decade, we'll be driving cars that get 56 miles per gallon. And that means that we are not only saving consumers money, but we're also taking carbon out of the atmosphere, and it is going to make a huge difference in terms of our environment, and that's because of you and the campaign that you helped run in 2008.Change is the fight that we won to stop sending $60 billion in taxpayer subsidies to the banks that were giving out student loans, and today that money is going directly to students. And as a consequence, there are millions of young people all across the country who have less of a debt burden and are better able to afford college. That's because of you, because of the work that you did.Change is health care reform. After a century of trying, a reform that will finally make sure that nobody goes bankrupt in America just because they get sick. And by the way, change is the 1 million young Americans who are already receiving insurance that weren't getting it before, because they can now stay on their parent's health insurance until they're 26 years old. That's a change that you made. At the same time, it provides everybody protection, so that if you get sick, if you have a preexisting condition, you can still afford to get health insurance, you'll still have access to quality care. That's the kind of changes that you brought about because of the work you did in 2008.Change is the fact that, for the first time in history, it doesn't matter who you love if you want to serve this country that we all love. We ended ""don't ask, don't tell"" because of the change that you made.And change is keeping one of the first promises I made in my campaign in 2008. We are bringing the war in Iraq to a close. By the end of this year, all our troops will be home for the holidays.And we've been working smarter and more effectively on national security, and that is why we have decimated Al Qaida. It's weaker than it's ever been before. And Usama bin Laden will never walk this Earth again.But we've been able to do it while sticking to our values. I was asked yesterday at a press conference about waterboarding. We didn't need to resort to that in order to protect our homeland and protect the people we love.Now, many of these changes weren't easy. Some of them were risky. Many of them came in the face of tough opposition and powerful lobbyists and special interests that were pouring millions of dollars into television ads to try to keep things just as they were. And it's no secret that the steps that we took weren't always politically popular. But this progress has been possible because of you, because you stood up and made your voices heard, because you knocked on doors and you made phone calls and you got in arguments with family members at Thanksgiving and--[laughter]. You kept up the fight for change long after the election was over, and that should make you proud. It should make you hopeful. But it can't make us satisfied. It can't make us complacent, because we've got so much more work to do.Everything we fought for in the last election is now at stake in the next election. The very core of what this country stands for is on the line. The basic promise that no matter who you are or where you come from, what you look like, that you can make it in America if you try, that vision is on the line.This financial and economic crisis that we've been through, it struck months before I took office, and it put more Americans out of work than at any time since the Great Depression. But it was also the culmination of a decade in which the middle class was falling further and further behind. More good jobs in manufacturing left our shores. More of our prosperity was built on risky financial deals instead of us actually making stuff. We racked up bigger and bigger piles of debt, even as incomes fell and wages flatlined and the cost of everything from college to health care kept on going up. All those things were taking place long before the 2008 financial crisis.So these problems didn't happen overnight, and the truth is they won't be solved overnight. It's going to take a few more years to meet the challenges that have been a decade in the making, and I think the American people understand that.What they don't understand is leaders who refuse to take action. They don't understand a Congress that can't seem to move with a sense of urgency about the problems that America is facing. What they're sick and tired of is watching the people who are supposed to represent them put party ahead of country and the next election before the next generation.President Kennedy used to say that, after he took office, what surprised him most about Washington was finding out that things were just as bad as he'd been saying they were. [Laughter] I can relate. [Laughter] When you've got the top Republican in the Senate saying that his party's number-one priority isn't putting people back to work, isn't trying to fix the economy, but is to try to defeat me, you've got a sense that things in Washington aren't really on the level.That's how you end up with Republicans in Congress voting against all kinds of jobs proposals that they actually supported in the past. Tax cuts for workers and small business, rebuilding our roads and our bridges, putting cops and teachers back to work, these aren't partisan issues. These are commonsense approaches to putting people back to work at a time when the unemployment rate is way too high. But politics seems to override everything in Washington these days. And people are tired of it, and they expect it to change.They might think it's a smart political strategy, but it's not a strategy to make America stronger. It's not a strategy to relieve some of the pain and difficulty that families are feeling all across the country, including here in Hawaii. It's not a strategy to help middle class families who've been working two and three shifts just to put food on the table, if they can find a job. It's not a strategy for us winning the future.So we've got a choice in 2012. The question is not whether people are still hurting. The question is whether--it not whether our economy is still on the mend. There's no doubt that things are tough right now. Of course, people are hurting. Of course, the economy is still struggling. The question is what do we do about it? The debate we need to have in this election is about where we go from here.And the Republicans in Congress and the candidates running for President, they've got a very specific idea of where they want to take this country. To their credit, they're not hiding it. Watch these debates. [Laughter] They want to reduce the deficit by gutting our investment in education, in research and technology, our investment in rebuilding our roads and our bridges and our airports and our ports.Now, I believe that since I already signed a trillion dollars' worth of spending cuts and have proposed to make even more, it's time to reduce the deficit not just by cutting, but also by asking the wealthiest among, the most fortunate among us, to do a little more to pay their fair share.And by the way, most folks who can afford it, they're willing to do a little bit more to make this country stronger. They just want to make sure that if they're doing a little bit more, the Government is working a little bit better, that the money is being spent well, that it's going to things like education that are critical to our future.The Republicans in Congress and on the campaign trail want to make Medicare a form of private insurance that seniors have to shop for with a voucher that probably will not cover all of the cost. I believe we can lower the cost of Medicare with reforms that still guarantee a dignified retirement that our seniors have earned.And by the way, I speak as somebody who--it was only a couple of years ago when I was here watching my grandmother fade away. And she had had a successful career at Bank of Hawaii. She had the kind of retirement that a lot of people don't have these days, but knowing that Medicare was there for her made all the difference in the world. This is not an abstraction. Everybody here has a family member who knows how important that is.The Republicans in Congress and these folks on the campaign trail, they think the best way for America to compete for new jobs and businesses is to follow other countries in a race to the bottom. Since places like China allow companies to pay low wages, they want to roll back the minimum wage and the right to organize here at home.Since other countries don't have the same antipollution measures that we have--dirtier air, dirtier water--their attitude is, let's go ahead and pollute. That's how we're going to compete.Now, I don't think that we should have any more regulations than the health and the safety of the American people require. That's why I've already made reforms that will save businesses billions of dollars and why we put in place fewer regulations than the Bush administration did in its first 2 years.Think about that. When you're watching television and everybody is talking about how the Obama administration is regulating businesses to death, we've actually put fewer regulations in place, smarter regulations in place, with much higher benefits at much lower cost. That's our track record.But I don't believe, even as we're reforming our regulatory system, that we should have a race to the bottom. We're not going to the win the competition in Asia-Pacific region by seeing if we can have the lowest wages and the worst pollution. We can't win that race. We've got to have the highest skilled workers, the best infrastructure, the most dynamic innovation economy. That's the race that we can win. That should be our focus.We should be competing to make our schools the envy of the world, to give our workers the best skills and training, to put college educations within the reach of anybody who is willing to work hard. We should be in a race to give our businesses the ability to move people and services quickly and effectively all around the world. We should be in a race to make those investments in NIH and the National Science Foundation and all the things that help to create to the Internet and GPS, those things that have created entire new industries.We should be focused on clean energy. Folks here in Hawaii understand that we can't keep on doing business the way we're doing it. We've got to start changing. And it gives us enormous opportunities for jobs and growth. That should be the race that we're trying to win.We should make sure that the next generation of manufacturing takes route not in Asia, not in Europe, but right here in the United States of America. I don't want this nation just to be known for its consumption; I want us to be known for building and producing things and selling those goods all around the world. That's what this APEC conference has been about.So this competition for new jobs and businesses and middle class security, that's the race I know we can win. But you don't win it by saying every American is in it on their own. We're not going to win it if we just hand out more tax cuts to people who don't need them, let companies play by their own rules without any restriction, and we just hope somehow that the success of the wealthiest few translates in the prosperity for everybody else.We have tried that, by the way. We tried it for 10 years. It's part of what got into the mess that we're in. It doesn't work. It didn't work for Herbert Hoover, when it was called trickle-down economics during the Depression. It didn't work between 2000 and 2008, and it won't work today. And the reason it won't work is because we are not a country that is built on survival of the fittest. That's not who we are. We believe in the survival of the Nation. We believe that we all have a stake in each other's success, that if we can attract outstanding teachers to a profession by giving that teacher the pay that she deserves, that teacher goes on and educates the next Steve Jobs. And then suddenly, we've got a whole new business, whole new industry, and everybody can succeed.We believe that if we provide faster Internet service to rural America or parts that have been left out of the Internet revolution so that a store owner can now sell goods around the world or if we build a new bridge that saves the shipping company time and money, then workers and customers all around the world are going to prosper. That is not a Democratic idea or a Republican idea. That is an American idea.It was a Republican named Abraham Lincoln--you may have heard of him--who launched the transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Sciences, the first land-grant colleges. He understood that we've got to make investments in our common future. It was a Republican, Teddy Roosevelt, who called for a progressive income tax, not a Democrat. It was a Republican named Dwight Eisenhower, who built the Interstate Highway System. It was with the help of Republicans in Congress that FDR gave millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, the chance to go to college on the GI bill.And that same spirit of common purpose I believe exists today; it just doesn't exist in Washington. But it exists among the American people. It exists here in Hawaii.When I get out of the Capitol, I see it all the time--when you talk to people on Main Streets and in town halls. It's there when people get asked if they think you should build a new road or invest in clean energy or put teachers back in the classroom, they'll say absolutely--huge majorities--Democrats, Republicans, and Independents.It's there when folks who are asked if the wealthiest Americans should pay their fair share. A majority--Democrats, Independents, Republicans--and the majority of wealthy folks, say, yes, that's a good idea for us to be able to lower our deficit and still invest in our future.So our politics in Washington may be divided, but most Americans still understand that we can do more if we do it together, that no matter who we are or where we come from, we rise or fall as one Nation and one people. And that's what's at stake right now. That's what this election is about.So I know it's been a tough 3 years, and I know that the change that we fought for in 2008 hasn't always been easy. There have been setbacks. There have been false starts. And sometimes, it may be tempting to believe that Washington, you just can't change. But remember what I always used to say during the campaign. Even on Inauguration night I said it. I said real change, big change is hard. It takes time. It takes more than a single term. It takes more than a single President. It takes all of you. It takes ordinary citizens who are committed to continuing to fight and to push to keep inching our country closer and closer to our ideals.That's how a band of colonials were able to create this incredible country, just out of an idea, a revolutionary idea. That's how the greatest generation was able to overcome more than a decade of war and depression to build the greatest middle class on Earth. That's how we got the civil rights movement. That's how we got the women's rights movement. Inch by inch, step by step. Change is hard, and it takes time. But in America, it's always been possible.And so I hope that all of you recommit yourselves and feel just as energized about 2012 as you did in 2008. And I'll remind you of something else that I said back then. I said, I am not a perfect man and I will not be a perfect President. Michelle can testify to that. [Laughter] But you know what I also promised in 2008? I said I would always tell you what I believe. I will always tell you where I stand. And I'll wake up every single day fighting for you and that vision of America that we share.So if all of you still believe, if all of you still have hope--you may not have the old posters from 2008--[laughter]--but if you share that vision and determination to see it through, if you are willing to do just what you did in 2008 and maybe even a little more knocking on doors and making phone calls and getting people involved and getting people engaged, I guarantee you we will not just win an election, but more importantly, we will continue this country on a journey that makes sure that our children and our grandchildren have a better future. And we will remind the entire world just why it is that the United States of America is the greatest country on Earth.Thank you very much, everybody. God bless you. God bless America. Thank you.",2008,obama
"Well, let me begin by just thanking Jack and Phyllis and their adorable grandchildren. [Laughter] And their children--I don't want to skip over a generation. [Laughter] But the grandchildren are really my buddies. This guy says he's going to be a future President. [Laughter] So I'm just kind of warming up the seat for him. [Laughter]But in addition to the Rosens, I want to make sure that everybody had a chance to say hello to somebody who has been a dear friend and is an outstanding DNC chair, Debbie Wasserman Schultz.I'm going to keep my remarks very brief at the top, because what I want to do is spend as much time in dialogue and answering questions as possible.When I came into office, we knew that this was going to be an extraordinary time in the life of the country and in the world. I don't think any of us realized what an extraordinary transformation would be taking place over these last several years. They've been tough years. They've been tough years for the American people, they've been tough for the world, and we're not out of the woods yet. But I begin any meeting like this by saying that we should remind ourselves how much we've accomplished over the last 3 years.When we came into office, the economy was contracting at 9 percent. It has grown over the last 3 years, not as fast as we'd like, but we have been able to sustain a fairly steady pace of growth. When I came into office, we had lost 4 million jobs before I was sworn in and 4 million jobs in the 3 months after I was sworn in. About 6 months later, we were creating jobs, and we've had private sector job growth for 20 consecutive months.Along the way, in addition to preventing a financial meltdown and preventing a second Great Depression, we were able to pass a historic health care bill that's going to make sure that 30 million people have coverage. We were able to pass a Wall Street reform package that, although some folks in New York are still grousing about it--[laughter]--is going to ensure that we do not have the same kinds of crisis that we had in the past. We were able to make sure that we ended the war in Iraq as promised, and by the end of this year, we're going to have all of our troops out, which is going to be an extraordinary homecoming for families all across America. Thanks to the great work of folks like Debbie, we were able to end practices like ""don't ask, don't tell,"" make sure that we expanded college loans for millions of students all across the country.So a huge amount of progress has been made, but what we also know is we've still got a lot more work to do. On the domestic front--Jack and I were just downstairs talking--the housing market and the real estate market is still way too weak, and we've got to do more. We're doing some stuff administratively. We're hoping that we can get a little more cooperation from Congress to be more aggressive in tackling the housing market and the real estate market.We still have to put people back to work. And I was just in Pennsylvania talking about why it's so important to make sure that we pass a--continue, essentially, a payroll tax cut that helps small businesses and individual families so that there's more money in circulation and businesses can really latch on to this recovery and start expanding their payrolls.Internationally, we've been managing, I think, an extraordinary period not just of two wars, which we're now winding down, but as Jack alluded to, enormous tumult in the Middle East. And so far at least, what we've been able to do is manage it in a way that positions America to stand on the side of democracy, but also be very firm with respect to the security of our allies. And obviously, no ally is more important than the State of Israel.And as Jack alluded to, this administration--I try not to pat myself too much on the back, but this administration has done more in terms of the security of the State of Israel than any previous administration. And that's not just our opinion, that's the opinion of the Israeli Government. Whether it's making sure that our intelligence cooperation is effective, to making sure that we're able to construct something like an Iron Dome so that we don't have missiles raining down on Tel Aviv, we have been consistent in insisting that we don't compromise when it comes to Israel's security. And that's not just something I say privately, that's something that I said in the U.N. General Assembly. And that will continue.We do have enormous challenges in making sure that the changes that are taking place in Egypt, the changes that are taking place throughout the region do not end up manifesting themselves in anti-Western or anti-Israel policies. And that's something that we're going to have to pay close attention to and work diligently on in the months to come.In the meantime, there are other regions in the world in which we're making enormous progress. I mean, we've been able to not only reset relations with Russia, manage relations with China, but we've also been able to mobilize world opinion around U.S. leadership in a way that many people had thought had been lost when I came into office back in 2008.So the bottom line is this: Over the last 3 years, we have made enormous progress. People aren't feeling all that progress yet because we had fallen so far and some of the problems that we faced, whether it was on health care or energy or employment, those are problems that had been building up over decades. And we never anticipated that we would solve them over night because these problems weren't created overnight. But the trajectory of the country at this point is sound.The question is, in 2012, does it continue? And frankly, we've got another party that--how will I say this charitably--[laughter]--in the past, I think, has been willing, at times, to put country ahead of party, but I'd say over the last couple of years, has not. Everything has become politicized, from the most modest appointment to getting judges on the bench, to trying to make sure the economy grows. Everything has been looked at through a political lens. And that is what people are tired of. And frankly, that's the reason that Congress right now is polling at 9 percent.People want Washington to work on behalf of the American people, not on behalf of folks in Washington and special interests. And that has been a great challenge. This election in 2012 is going to pose a decision for the American people in terms of what direction we want to go in. There's fundamental differences in terms of direction.Their view is that less regulation, a shriveled government that is not doing much for people in terms of giving them a ladder up into the middle class, that that's their best vision; that we don't invest in science, that we don't invest in education, that we don't invest in infrastructure and transportation--all the things that made us a great power, they seem willing to abandon for ideological reasons.And I was so moved listening to Jack's story, because Jack is exactly right: His story is our story. It's my story; it's your story. At some point our parents, grandparents, great-grandparents came to this country seeking opportunity. And they had to work hard, they had to hold themselves personally responsible, they had to take risks. But they also knew that there was a country here where if you did try hard, then somebody might give you a little bit of help; that we were in it together, there were ladders of opportunity that existed.And that's what we have to rebuild for the 21st century. And that requires us to make some decisions about, are we going to have the best schools in this country, are we going to have the best infrastructure, are we going to do what it takes so these guys end up being part of an America where everybody can still make it if they try, regardless of whether they came from Russia or they came from Poland or they came from Mexico or they came from Kenya, that they're going to have a chance to succeed and live out the same kind of dreams that the Rosen family has been able to live out.Our kids are going to be fine. And I always tell Malia and Sasha, look, you guys, I don't worry about you--I mean, I worry the way parents worry--but they're on a path that is going to be successful, even if the country as a whole is not successful. But that's not our vision of America. I don't want an America where my kids are living behind walls and gates and can't feel a part of a country that is giving everybody a shot.And that's what we're fighting for. That's what 2012 is going to be all about. And I'm going to need your help to do it.So thank you very much.",2008,obama
"Thank you very much. You're making me blush. [Laughter]Well, because I see so many good friends around this room, I am not going to give a long speech. What I like to do when I see you guys is just have a good conversation.We are going through a very interesting time in Washington. We have spent the last 2 or 3 months insisting that Congress needs to act, but that we are not going to wait for them to act, because the American people expect that we're going to be doing some things to make sure that we're putting people back to work and we're getting the economy growing again.And we're starting to see just a hint of a response out of Congress. Last week, part of our ""American Jobs Act,"" which provided tax benefits for companies that hire veterans, was actually passed and signed into law. Over the last couple of days, Mr. Boehner and Mr. McConnell have both indicated that it probably does make sense not to have taxes go up for middle class families, particularly since they've all taken an oath not to raise taxes.And so it's possible that we see some additional progress over the next couple of weeks that can continue to help strengthen the economy and get us through what has been a very difficult period not just for the United States, but obviously for the world economy.We still have a lot of headwinds ahead of us. Europe is probably the biggest one. And I'm spending an awful lot of time making transatlantic calls, because when you look at what's happening in Europe, both to the banks and for countries like Italy that need to refinance their debt, that can have a profound impact on what happens here. But I am cautiously hopeful that they end up recognizing that they need to do the right thing, and we're providing them as much assistance as we can to make sure that the situation is stabilized, because it will have an impact all around the world.In the meantime, even if we get through this budget cycle, even if we get the payroll tax cut passed, the challenges that led me to run in 2008, many of them are still there. We still have a health care system that has to get more efficient and that has to improve its quality. And so we're going to have to implement the Affordable Care Act in 2014, and that means I've got to win in 2012.We still have to implement Dodd-Frank in an effective way that assures that banks are properly capitalized and that folks are not socializing the risks that they take on Wall Street. And we've made enormous progress on implementation, but in order to finish the job, I'm going to have to have a second term.We still don't have all the energy policies in place that we need to free ourselves from dependence on foreign oil and adequately deal with climate change, despite the fact that we've doubled fuel economy standards on cars and made enormous progress on clean energy, and that means that I'm going to need another term to finish the job.We have made enormous progress in education and broken through a lot of the traditional left-right arguments about accountability and charter schools and teacher training. But in order for us to implement what is necessarily a decade-long project to get our education system back to where it needs to be, I'm going to need a few more years to finish the job.On foreign policy, I just came back from an extraordinary trip to Asia. And it's fascinating, here in the United States, it's fashionable to talk about America's diminished role in the world. But you wouldn't know it if you were traveling around Asia, the fastest growing part of the world, where folks are incredibly hungry for American leadership and where we were organizing a trade partnership with most of the major economies there that everybody was eager to join because they recognize that America is willing to play by the rules and those rules can benefit everybody and not just some.We were able to solidify security arrangements that assure freedom of passage and navigation and help to underwrite the mutual security of the Asia-Pacific region. And what was fascinating was how much people still look to America as a power that is not simply self-interested, but it also interested in the well-being of people outside our borders, and a power--a superpower that not only projects military might, but also projects values.In the Middle East, obviously, it's an enormous time of transition, and there are going to be some bumpy moments along the way. But we have positioned ourselves squarely on the side of freedom and democracy. And we are, I think, in a position--particularly as we end the war in Iraq and have all our troops home in time for the holidays this year and as we begin to transition in Afghanistan--we're in a position to help shape what, over the long term, could be a transformation in that region that benefits millions of people. And we can do it even as we are foursquare insisting on Israel's security.And so this is a moment of enormous promise. But I need a couple more years to finish the job. And that's why it's going to be so important that, having worked through all the angst of the last year or two, where people are trying to figure out, why didn't we get everything done in the first 3 years, it's time for us to refocus and make sure that we understand that change that we can believe in was never change overnight, but rather, it was going to be a slow, steady progression in which this aircraft carrier we call the United States of America slowly shifts in a direction that promises more opportunity, more caring for those who need help, more tolerance of our differences, the kind of America we want our kids and our grandkids to grow up in.We're well on our way, but we've got to finish the job. And for that I'm going to need your help. And that's why, as I look around the room, I could not be more grateful for friends who have stood with me through thick and through thin.So thank you very much, everybody. Appreciate it.",2008,obama
"Hello, New York! It is good to be in New York in the holiday season. Everybody is out and about, there's a little nip in the air, Christmas tree at Rockefeller Center up and lit. Something about this time of year makes this city feel like anything is possible. It is great to be here. And I see some familiar faces in the crowd, so thank you for being here.We have some special guests. All of you are special, but I want to make sure that you acknowledge them. First of all, the head of the DNC, Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz, is here. She's doing an outstanding job. One of the finest public servants we have up and coming, New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman is in the house. The New York City public advocate, Bill de Blasio, is here. And give it up for the folks who performed for you; Ali Wentworth and Regina Spektor, thank you.Now, I am here today because I need your help. But I'm also here because the country needs your help. There was a reason why so many of you worked so hard on our 2008 campaign, and it wasn't because you thought that it was going to be a cakewalk to elect Barack Hussein Obama. [Laughter] If you were going for easy, that was not the route to take. You did not take a poll that told you that this was going to be a sure thing. And besides, our campaign was not about me, it was about a vision that we shared for America. It wasn't a narrow, cramped vision of an America where everybody is fending for themselves. It was a vision of a big and a compassionate America, where everybody who works hard has a chance to get ahead, not just those at the very top, not just those born into wealth or privilege, a vision that says the more Americans who succeed, the more America succeeds.That's the vision that we share. That's the change that we believed in. And we knew it wasn't going to come easy, and we knew it wasn't going to come quickly. But 3 years later, because of what you did in 2008, we have already started to see what change looks like.Think about it. Change is the first bill I signed into law, a law that says you get an equal day's work--somebody who puts in an equal day's work should get equal day's pay, because our daughters should be treated just like our sons and have the same opportunities. That's change.Change is the decision we made to rescue the auto company from collapse, even when some politicians were saying we should let Detroit go bankrupt. Change is the more than 1 million jobs that we saved and the local businesses that are picking up again and the fuel-efficient cars that are now rolling off the assembly lines with that word ""Made in America"" stamped on them.Change is the decision we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our addiction to oil and finally raise fuel efficiency standards for the first time in 30 years. And because of that, by the next decade, we'll be driving cars that get 55 miles a gallon at least. That's what change is.Change is the fight we won to stop handing out $60 billion worth of tax subsidies to banks and put that $60 billion into student loans. And today, millions of students are getting more help going to college at a time when they need it most. That's because of your work in 2008.Change is health care reform that we passed after a century of trying, reform that will finally ensure that in the United States of America, nobody is going to go bankrupt because they get sick. And you've got a million young people who are already with health insurance today, on their parent's plan because of the laws that we passed. Change is the millions of Americans who can no longer be denied or dropped from their health insurance at a time when they need the care the most. That's what change is.Change is the fact that for the first time in history, you don't have to hide who you love in order to serve the country that you love--ending ""don't ask, don't tell."" Change is keeping one of the first promises I made in 2008: By the end of December, the war in Iraq will be officially over, our troops are coming home. They will be rejoining their families for the holidays.And it hasn't made us weaker, it's made us stronger. We've refocused our efforts on the terrorists who actually carried out 9/11. And thanks to our brave men and women in uniform, Al Qaida is weaker than it has ever been and Usama bin Laden will never walk this Earth again. That's because of what you did in 2008.A lot of this wasn't easy. Some of it was risky. It came in the face of tough opposition and powerful lobbyists and special interests who spent millions of dollars to keep things the way they were. It's no secret that the steps we took haven't always been politically popular with the crowd in Washington. But all this progress was made because of you, because you stood up and made your voices heard, because you knocked on doors and you made phone calls and sent out e-mails. And you kept up the fight for change long after the election was over.You should be proud of what got done. It should make you hopeful. But it can't make us complacent, because everything that we fought for during the last election and everything that we still have to do to make sure this country gives a fair shot to everybody is at stake in 2012. Every single thing that we care about is at stake in this next election. The very core of what this country stands for is on the line. The basic promise that no matter who you are, no matter where you come from, this is a place where you can make it if we try.You know, I just came from another fundraising event at the home of somebody now extraordinarily successful. His parents were Holocaust survivors, and he described, in introducing me, how they were able to come over here with almost nothing and yet still provide a good public education for their kids and still give them a leg up and allow them to succeed. And the question is, 20 years from now, 30 years from now, are we going to be able to say the same thing about the next generation coming up?The crisis that struck in the months before I took office put more Americans out of work than at any time since the Great Depression. And if you actually look at a chart, 3 months before I was sworn in we lost 4 million jobs; 3 months after I was sworn in we lost another 4 million. A few months later, because of our economic policies, the economy started to grow again and people started going to work again. And we've had private sector job growth for 21 consecutive months.But that 8 million that lost their jobs, it has been brutal. And it was the culmination of a decade in which the middle class fell further and further behind. More good jobs in manufacturing left our shores. More of our prosperity was built on risky financial deals or on a housing bubble, and we racked up greater piles of debt, even as our incomes fell and our wages flatlined and the cost of everything from college to health care kept on going up.These problems didn't happen overnight, and they weren't going to be solved overnight. And it's going to take more than a few years to meet the challenges that had been decades in the making. The American people understand that. But what the American people don't understand are leaders who refuse to take action at such a critical time in this Nation's history. They're sick and tired of watching people who are supposed to represent America put party ahead of country or the next election ahead of the next generation.President Kennedy used to say, after he took office, what surprised him most about Washington was finding out that things were just as bad as he'd been saying they were. [Laughter] And I can relate to that. [Laughter] When you've got the top Republican in the Senate saying almost from the get-go that his number-one concern, his party's number-one priority, wasn't to fix the economy, wasn't to put people back to work, but was to beat the President, then you get a sense that things really aren't on the level.That's how you end up with Republicans in Congress voting against all kinds of jobs proposals that they supported in the past: tax cuts for workers, tax cuts for small businesses, rebuilding roads and bridges, putting cops and teachers back to work. And they're at it again right now.Last year, right around this time, both parties came together to cut payroll taxes for the typical household by a thousand dollars this year. And that helped boost the economy at a time when it was weak. And it is still weak, so we should be doing the same thing. Except the tax cut is set to expire by the end of this month, and if that happens, a typical middle class family will see a thousand-dollar tax increase at the worst possible time for the economy and for these families.So what I've said is, let's not just extend that tax cut another year to help folks get back on solid footing, let's expand it. Let's give the typical working family a $1,500 tax cut. And while we're at it, let's cut taxes for small businesses who are creating jobs in America. Some Republicans used to love these tax cuts, until I proposed them. [Laughter] Suddenly, they've started lining up against them. A lot of them have sworn--they've taken an oath: ""We're never going to raise taxes as long as we live""--religion.But now they're voting against this tax cut, and as a consequence, you could potentially see working folks see an extra thousand dollars coming out of their paycheck this year. They'll fight with everything they have to protect the tax cuts of the wealthiest Americans, but they've got no problem breaking the oath when it comes to raising taxes on middle class families, just to score some political points.And they may think that's a smart political strategy, although I'm noticing that over the last couple of days they've been realizing this may not work out so well for them. [Laughter] It's not a strategy to create jobs. It's not a strategy to help middle class families who have been working two to three shifts just to put food on the table. And it's not a strategy to help America succeed, and we've all got a stake in that.If you were able to come to this fundraiser, you've probably got a job, and you're doing pretty well, relatively speaking. But you know what, our success depends on everybody's success. If you've got a business, you need customers. If you're a law firm, you need clients. If you've got a restaurant, you need somebody who can afford to buy dinner at your restaurant. If you are a parent, then it's not good enough that you can get a good education for your child, because your child's success is going to depend on how well educated every child is in this country.We have a choice in 2012. The question is not whether people are still hurting or whether the economy is growing as fast as it should be--it is not. A lot of folks are still hurting out there. Of course, the economy is still struggling. The question is, what are we going to do about it; what vision do we have for where we want to take this country? And it is not a technical question, it is a values question. It's about who we are, what we believe in. And that's the debate that we're going to have to have over the next year. It's about where we're going to go.The Republicans in Congress and the candidates who are running for President--I hope all of you are watching these Republican debates. [Laughter] You need to see what's going on to get a sense of what's at stake. [Laughter] They've got a very specific idea about where they want to take this country. They want to reduce the deficit, which we need to do, not in a balanced way, but by gutting our investments in education, by slashing spending in research and technology, by letting our infrastructure, our roads and our bridges and our airports, crumble.Now, I believe that since I already signed a law that reduced our deficit by a trillion dollars and I proposed to do another $2.5 million in deficit reduction, I've got some credibility in saying that I'm prepared to make some tough decisions to close that gap. But we've got to do it in a way that is fair for everybody. And that means asking the wealthiest among us to do our fair share. That we don't just ask for sacrifices from seniors, we don't just ask for sacrifices from union members, we don't just ask for sacrifices from teachers, we ask for sacrifices from the people who are in the best position to sacrifice. That's a fundamental difference in--[applause]--it's a fundamental difference in our vision about where we want to take this country.The Republicans in Congress and on the campaign trail want to make Medicare a form of private insurance that seniors have to shop for with a voucher that most independent analysts say won't cover the full cost of their health care. Now, I believe we can lower the cost of Medicare--and we need to--with reforms that still guarantee a dignified retirement that our seniors have earned. That's what I believe. That is a values question. It is not just a technical question.They think the best way for America to compete for new jobs and businesses is to follow other countries in a race to the bottom. So their attitude is, well, since places like China allow companies to pay much lower wages, let's roll back our minimum wage. Let's eliminate our right to organize here at home. Since other countries allow corporations to pollute as much as they want, we need to get rid of our regulations that protect us from dirty air and dirty water.I don't think we should have any more regulations than the health and safety of the American people require. And I've already made reforms that will save businesses billions of dollars. We've put in place fewer regulations than the Bush administration, although the benefits have been a lot higher.But I don't believe that a race to the bottom is a race that America should try to win. We should be in a race to the top. And that is a race we can win. We shouldn't be competing to see if we can pay the lowest wages, we should be competing to see if our schools are the envy of the world. If we're giving our workers the best skills and the best training and we're putting a college education within the reach of every young person who wants to go, that should be the race that we're trying to win.We should be in a race to give our businesses the best access to the newest airports and the newest roads and the newest bridges, the most Internet access. We should be in a race to support the scientists and researchers who are trying to make the next breakthrough in clean energy or medicine and make it happen right here in the United States of America. That's the race we should be in.We should be in a race to make sure that the next generation of manufacturing takes root not in Asia, not in Europe, but in Detroit and Cleveland and Pittsburgh and here in New York. I don't want this country to just be known for buying and consuming. I want us to be known for building and selling products all around the world. That's what we should be focused on. And this competition for new jobs and new businesses, middle class security, that's a race we can win. That's a race we can win.You know, I took a trip to Asia, and here, sometimes the pundits and the newspapers and the TV commentators love to talk about how America is slipping and America is in decline, and you know what, that's not what you feel when you're in Asia. They're looking to us for leadership. They know that America is great not just because we're powerful, but also because we have a set of values that the world admires, that we don't just think about what's good for us, but we're also thinking about what's good for the world. That's what makes us special. That's what makes us exceptional.But we can't win this race and we can't continue American leadership with an attitude that says, it's every American for themselves. We're not going to win it if our whole philosophy is built on handing out more tax cuts to people who don't need them and weren't even asking for them and telling companies, don't worry, you can play by your own set of rules regardless of the consequences, and hope that the success of the wealthiest few translates somehow into prosperity for everybody else. That is not how America was built. That theory does not work. It didn't work when Herbert Hoover called it ""trickle-down economics"" before the Depression. It didn't work when we tried it in the last decade. It won't work today.It won't work because we aren't a country that practices survival of the fittest. We believe in the survival of the Nation, and we believe that we all have a stake in each other's success. We believe that if we can attract outstanding teachers to the profession by giving him or her the pay that they deserve and that teacher goes on to educate some real smart kid, the next Steve Jobs, we all benefit. That's good for all of us. If we provide faster Internet service to rural America and that store owner out in some small town is now selling his goods all around the world, that's good for all of us. If we build a new bridge that saves a shipping company time and money, workers and customers all over the country will do better. If we have rules in place that protect consumers from unscrupulous financial practices, that will be good for the consumer, and by the way, that will be good for the financial system.This idea has not been, historically, a Democratic or a Republican idea, this is an American idea. The first Republican President--pretty good President, guy named Abraham Lincoln--[laughter]--launched the transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Sciences, the first land-grant colleges, Government programs in the middle of a Civil War. It was a Republican--Teddy Roosevelt--who called for a progressive income tax, saying, you know what, I want each generation to have opportunity, and we don't want just a small segment of our society that is able to amass more and more political power. It was a Republican--Dwight Eisenhower--who built the Interstate Highway System. Republicans participated with FDR in giving millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, the chance to go to college on the GI bill. This is an American idea.And that same spirit of common purpose, it still exists. I see it every single day, maybe not always in Washington, but out in America, it's there. Here in New York, it's there. It's in small towns, it's in big cities. You talk to folks on Main Streets, you talk to folks in town halls, you go to a diner, our politics may be divided, but most Americans still understand we will stand or fall together. And no matter who we are, no matter where we come from, we're one Nation, and we're one people. And that's what's at stake in this election. That's what this election is all about.Now, I know it has been 3 wrenching years for this country. And when you look back at 2008, I think a lot of folks thought, boy, this is so exciting, and it's going to just--we're going to snap our fingers, and as soon as we get in there everything will be solved. And after all that's happened in Washington, it may be tempting to believe that, you know what, change isn't as possible as we thought. But I've got to remind people of what I said not just during the campaign, but even on the night we won. I said real change, big change, is hard. It takes time. It takes more than a single term. It may take more than a single President. It requires ordinary citizens who are committed to keep--continuing the fight, to keep pushing, to keep inching this country closer to its highest ideals.It's how this Nation was created: a band of colonists deciding, you know what, we're going to try this new idea, a government of and by and for the people. It's how the greatest generation was able to overcome more than a decade of war and a depression to build the largest middle class in history.It's how young people fought against billy clubs and fire hoses and dogs to ensure that their kids and their grandkids could grow up in a country where there was no barrier to who you can become.Change has always been hard, but it's possible. I've seen it, and I have lived it, and so have many of you. So you know, I've been saying at some of these fundraisers and events around the country, you know, I know I'm a little grayer than I was. [Laughter] And I know that the cynicism has risen again since the last election. And I know that folks are frustrated with Washington. But the only way to end the game-playing and the point-scoring that passes for politics this day is to send a message in this election that we are not backing down, we are not giving up, that we are going to keep pushing and we continue to fight and we still hope and we are still going after change that we believe in.And I'm going to need you to do it. I've often--I've said--I said this all the time during the campaign: I am not a perfect man; I will not be a perfect President. But there are some things I can promise you: I will always tell you what I believe in, I will always tell you where I stand, and every single day I am thinking about you, your families, our kids, and how we can make America work for everybody. That's always been my promise. And I've kept that promise.So if you're willing to keep pushing through all the frustrations that we may see and if you keep reminding yourselves of all that we've accomplished so far and if you keep your eyes on that prize, all the things that we can accomplish over the next 5 years, change will come.If you are willing to work harder in this election than you did in the last election, change will come. If you are willing to get on the phone again and knock on doors again, change will come. If you stick with me on this, change will come. Press on, everybody. Change will come.God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"Hello, everybody! Hello, hello, hello! Thank you. Love you guys. Thank you so much. All right, everybody have a seat. I don't want to milk this too much here. [Laughter]To Matthew, thank you for your extraordinary leadership. We could not be prouder of you. And for you to have made all the life-changing sacrifices to take on this job, it's something that I couldn't be prouder of. So please give Matthew a big round of applause. He's working hard.Jane Stetson, Andy Tobias, they are doing remarkable work for the DNC. And our outstanding chairwoman of the DNC, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, is in the house. Give her a big round of applause as well.I don't want to give a long speech. I want to save most of my time for questions and discussion with all of you. I've got two simple messages. Number one, thank you. I look around the room: Everybody here has gone above and beyond the call of duty, not just for the last few months, but for several years now. I'm reminded of what my friend Ab Mikva said about being friends with a politician: It's like having a perpetual child in college. [Laughter] It just never stops. [Laughter] But all of you have just done incredible work with great cheer and great determination. And I'm thankful for it.Which brings me to the second point. The reason you do it, I'd like to think, is a little bit because you like me and you think I'm a pretty good guy. [Laughter] I definitely know that part of it is because you love Michelle and think she's one of the best First Ladies we've ever had. But the main reason you do it is because you know what's at stake.Back in 2008, we used to talk about this being a historic moment for America, that we were at a crossroads in our history. Well, we haven't fully crossed the road, and in some ways, 2012 is even more important than it was 4 years ago. The choices could not be starker. The vision about where we want to take the country could not be more different.I gave a speech in Kansas last week where I talked about where we need to go as a country, a country that's based on everybody having a fair shot, a country that depends on everybody doing their fair share, a country where fair play applies across the board. And I talked about how, for decades now, people have felt that the basic compact that if you worked hard, you acted responsibly, you looked after your family, that you would be able to be in the middle class, stay in the middle class, get into the middle class, that your kids would have a better life than you did, that you'd have some semblance of security, that that compact had eroded.And it hadn't happened overnight, it wasn't going to be solved overnight, but there were going to be some critical things that we had to do to make sure that compact was restored: making investments in education so our kids are better prepared than anybody in the world, making sure that we've got the best infrastructure to move products and services and our businesses can thrive, making sure that we're investing in science and basic research, making sure that the rules of the road apply to everybody. So we're not building a bubble economy, but we're building an economy based on making stuff and exporting it around the world stamped with the words ""Made in America."" And most fundamentally, understanding that we're all in this together, it's not a few of us doing well and then the rest of us hoping that we get lucky, but rather, everybody as a team moving this country forward.And that vision, in contrast to a vision that basically says you are on your own, is what this election was about in 2008. It's what this election is going to be about in 2012. I am confident that the vision that we believe in so deeply and that we've worked so hard for is the vision that is truest to our history and most representative of the core decency of the American people.But we're going to have to fight for it. It's not a slam dunk. We're going to have to deliver this message effectively all across the country. And at a time when people have been battered by the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression and the worst economic crisis since the 1930s, it's understandable if people aren't feeling as chipper as they were back in 2008. There's going to be some skepticism. There's going to be some pushback.All of the things that we've done over the last 3 years--to rescue the economy and rescue the auto industry and end the war in Iraq and end ""don't ask, don't tell"" and make sure that health care is in place and financial reform brings back some integrity to the financial sector--all those things don't mean that much to somebody if they're still out of work right now or if their house is still underwater by $100,000.So yes, this is going to be tough. But I just want to remind all of you that you didn't decide to support Barack Hussein Obama because it was going to be easy. There were always easier choices to make, just as there would have been easier political choices for me to make. We took a flyer on this thing because we believe passionately in an America in which everybody is getting ahead.That's worth fighting for. And here's my message to you. If you guys stick with this, if you don't falter, if you stay steady, we are going to win this thing. We are going to win this thing, and America is going to win as a consequence.All right? Thank you, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you. Happy New Year, everybody. It looks like Gaspard got you all fired up.A few acknowledgements that I want to make: First of all, the OFA Virginia State director, Lise Clavel, is here, and we just want to thank our directors in the State because they do such hard work every day. Give them a big round of applause. The chair of our event this evening, Spencer Overton, thank you. One of my favorite singers, but more importantly, one of Michelle's favorite singers, Sara Bareilles--thank you for doing--and her band. We are grateful to them.And I am grateful to you.Audience member. We love you!The President. I love you back. I do.But I'm here not just to say I love you. [Laughter] I'm here because I need your help. And more importantly, I'm here because the country needs your help. There were a lot of reasons that many of you got involved in our campaign, worked your hearts out back in 2008. And it wasn't because you thought it was going to be easy. It wasn't because you thought it was a sure thing. You decided to support a candidate named Barack Hussein Obama. You didn't need a poll to know that that might be an uphill struggle. [Laughter]But what evolved during the course of that campaign, I think people more and more became aware of the fact that the campaign wasn't about me. It was about us. It was about our shared vision of America. It was about a vision of America that wasn't narrow, it wasn't cramped. It wasn't an idea that in America everybody goes out and fends for themselves and plays by their own rules and an America that's built on ""what's in it for me."" It was a vision of a big, bold, ambitious, compassionate, just America, where everybody who works hard has a chance to get ahead, not just those at the very top, but everybody. And it was a vision that said we're greater together than we are on our own. It was a vision that says everybody deserves a fair shot and everybody needs to do their fair share and everybody has to play by the same set of rules, and that when that happens, we all advance together.That's the vision that we shared. That's the change we believed in. You helped me believe in that change. It wasn't just me, it was you. And we knew it wasn't going to be easy. We knew the change we wanted wasn't going to come quickly.I was just talking to a group, they were reminiscing about the 2008 campaign. I said, you guys are engaging in some selective memory here. [Laughter] First of all, 2008 wasn't easy at all. There were all kinds of setbacks and all kinds of miscues, and there were times where I screwed up. But just over 3 years later, because of what you did in 2008, because you had faith, because you had confidence in the possibilities of this country, we've begun to see what change looks like.Think about it. Think about what's happened over the last 3 years.Change is the first bill I signed into law, a bill that says an equal day's work should mean an equal day's pay, because our daughters should have the same opportunities as our sons.Change is the decision we made to rescue an auto industry that was on the brink of collapse, even when some politicians said we should let them all go bankrupt. And 1 million jobs were saved, and the local businesses were picking up again. And now we've got the Big Three making money and rehiring workers, and fuel-efficient cars are rolling off the assembly line stamped with three proud words: Made in America. That's what change is.Change is the decision we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our oil addiction and go ahead and finally raise fuel efficiency standards on cars. And now, by the next decade, we are going to be driving cars that get 55 miles to a gallon. And that is going to help our environment. That will help our economy. That's going to help consumers. That's because of you. That's what change is.Change is the fight we won to stop handing $60 billion of subsidies to banks to manage the student loan program and go ahead and give it directly to students, and as a consequence, millions of young people have greater access to college than ever before.Change is the health care reform that we passed, after a century of trying, that will ensure that in America nobody goes bankrupt because they get sick. Already, 2.5 million young people have health insurance today because that law let them stay on their parent's plan. Seniors are already seeing discounts on their prescription drugs, preventive care available to everybody, folks with preexisting conditions in a position to finally get insurance instead of being left out in the cold. That's what change is, because of you. That's what we were fighting for: millions of Americans who can no longer be denied or dropped by their insurance companies when they need it most. That's what change is.Change is the fact that for the first time in our history, you don't have to hide who you love in order to serve the country you love. Because ""don't ask, don't tell"" is history. It is over.And change is keeping one of the first promises I made in 2008: ending the war in Iraq and bringing our troops home. The war is over, and our troops are home. And instead, we refocused our efforts on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11. And thanks to our brave men and women in uniform, Al Qaida is weaker than it's ever been and Usama bin Laden will never again walk the face of this Earth. That's what change is.And now, a lot of these changes weren't easy. A lot of these changes weren't easy, and some of them were risky. They all came in the face of tough opposition, powerful lobbyists, special interests spending millions to keep things the way they were. And it's no secret I haven't always taken the politically popular course, certainly not with the crowd in Washington. But this progress has been possible nevertheless because of you, because you guys didn't stop believing. You stood up. You made your voices heard. You were out there knocking on doors. You made phone calls. You kept up the fight for change long after the election was over.And that should make you proud, but it should also make you hopeful. It shouldn't make you satisfied. It shouldn't make us complacent. We have so much more work to do. And everything we fought for during the last election is at stake in this election. The very core of what this country stands for is on the line, the basic promise that no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, this is a place where you could make it if you try. The notion that we're all in this together, that we look out for one another, that's at stake in this election. Don't take my word for it. Watch some of these debates that have been going on up in New Hampshire.The crisis that struck in the months before I took office put more Americans out of work than any time since the Great Depression. But it was the culmination of a decade where the middle class had been losing ground. More good jobs and manufacturing left our shores. More of our prosperity was built on risky financial deals and homes that we couldn't afford. And we racked up greater debt, and incomes fell, and wages flatlined. And the cost of everything from college to groceries went through the roof.Now, these problems didn't happen overnight. And the truth is they're not going to be solved overnight. It is going to take us a few more years to meet all the challenges that have been decades in the making. And the American people understand that. What the American people don't understand are leaders who refuse to take action. They're sick and tired of watching people who are supposed to represent them put party ahead of country and the next election ahead of the next generation. That's what they don't understand. That's what they don't understand.You know, President Kennedy used to say after he took office what surprised him most about Washington was that things were just as bad as he had been saying they were. [Laughter] And I understand what he meant. [Laughter] When you've got the top Republican in the Senate saying his party's number-one priority is not to create jobs, not to fix the economy, but to beat me, that gives you a sense of the mentality here. Things aren't on the level. That's how you end up with Republicans in Congress voting against all kinds of proposals that they supported in the past. Tax cuts for workers and small businesses, rebuilding roads and bridges, putting cops and teachers back to work used to be bipartisan ideas.Now, I've said I will continue to look for every opportunity during the course of this year to work with Congress to move this country forward and create jobs.Audience member. We can't wait!The President. But we can't wait. [Laughter] When Congress--whenever this Congress refuses to act, in a way that hurts our economy and puts our people at risk, I've got an obligation as President to do what we can without them. I've got an obligation to work on behalf of you and the American people. I'm not going to let Members of Congress put party ideology ahead of the people that they were elected to serve, not when there's this much at stake.This is a make-or-break moment for this country, for the middle class in this country and folks who want to get into the middle class. So, for example, that's why last week I appointed Richard Cordray as America's consumer watchdog. Now, this is a man whose sole job is to look out for the best interests of American consumers, to protect families from the kinds of unfair or deceptive, abusive financial practices that helped to bring the economy to its knees. That shouldn't be controversial. Why would somebody be against that? [Laughter]And yet, for almost half a year, Republicans in the Senate blocked his appointment. They wouldn't even vote on it, not because they said he wasn't qualified, because they couldn't say that. Former attorney general--you had Democrats and Republicans across the country, including his home State of Ohio, saying he was qualified. They just wanted to weaken Wall Street reforms. They thought, well, this might be too tough on these financial firms. Now, does anybody here think that the reason we got into this financial mess was because we had too much oversight?Audience members. No!The President. Too much accountability?Audience members. No!The President. We shouldn't be weakening these rules, we should be strengthening these rules. When it comes to American workers and American families, we should be looking to protect them more, not less. And that's what we've been doing, and that's what we're going to keep on doing.That's also why I fought so hard last month to make sure that Congress didn't go home without preventing a tax increase on 160 million working Americans. And I'm glad. I'm glad Republicans finally came around and agreed to extend the payroll tax cut for working families into this year. But they've got to now extend it for the entire year. A lot of Republicans, they've sworn an oath: I will never raise taxes on anybody as long as I live. [Laughter] Well, don't make an exception for ordinary folks. It can't just apply to the wealthiest. Now is the time to prove you'll fight at least as hard for middle class folks and folks trying to get into the middle class as you do for the wealthiest Americans.So we've got a clear choice this year. People are hurting out there. They're going through a tough time. Everybody understands that the economy is not where it needs to be. It's growing. We've had 22 consecutive months of job growth in the private sector. But everybody understands we still got more work to do. Of course, it's got to move faster. Of course, the economy still has a long way to go. Everybody understands that.The question is what are we going to do about it. The debate we're going to have in this election is about where do we go from here. Because the Republicans in Congress and the candidates who are running for President, they've got a very specific idea of where they want to take this country. They say they want to reduce the deficit, but they're going to do it by gutting our investments in education and research and technology and infrastructure, our roads and our bridges and our airports.Look, I've already signed a trillion dollars' worth of spending cuts, but it's time to reduce the deficit by asking the wealthiest people in our society to pay their fair share. There's nothing wrong with that. People like me can afford it.Republicans in Congress and on the campaign trail, they want to make Medicare a form of private insurance that seniors have to shop for with a voucher, but the voucher might not cover all the costs. I think we can lower the cost of Medicare with reforms that still guarantee the dignified retirement of seniors, because they've earned it.Republicans in Congress and these candidates, they think that the best way for America to compete for new jobs and businesses is to follow other countries in a race to the bottom. They figure, well, China pays low wages, we should pay low wages. Let's roll back the minimum wage. Let's prevent folks from organizing for collective bargaining in this country. Since other countries allow corporations to pollute as much as they want, why not get rid of the protections that ensure our air is clean and our water is clean.I don't think we should have any more regulation than the health and the safety of the American people require. I've already made reforms that will save businesses billions of dollars. We are creating a smart Government. We've issued fewer regulations than the Bush administration.But I don't believe a race to the bottom is one that we should be trying to win. We should be trying to win the race to the top. We should be competing to make sure that we've got the best schools in the world and our workers have the best training and skills in the world and we've got a college education within reach of everybody who wants to go. That's the race we should be trying to win.We should be in a race to give our businesses the best roads and airports and railroads and best Internet access. We should be in a race to support the best scientists and researchers who are trying to make the next breakthrough in clean energy and medicine. And those should happen right here in the United States of America. That's the race we should be trying to win.We should be in a race to make sure that the next generation of manufacturing--the new products, the new services--that they're not created in Asia, they're not created in Europe, they're created here. They're created in America, in Detroit and Pittsburgh and Cleveland, Baltimore, Virginia. I want--I don't want us to just be known for buying stuff from other places. I want us to be known for building stuff and selling stuff all around the world--Made in America. That's what I want us to win.This competition for new jobs and new businesses and middle class security, that's a race we can win. But we can't win it if we just go back to the same things that got us into this mess in the first place. The same old tune: Hand out more tax cuts to folks who don't need them, and let companies play by their own rules, and hope that everything eventually trickles down to the rest of us. [Laughter]That doesn't work. It's never worked. We tried it. It didn't work in the Great Depression. It's not what led to the incredible postwar boom of the fifties and sixties. It didn't work when we tried it between 2000 and 2008. It won't work now.We can't go back to this brand of you're-on-your-own economics. We are not a country that was built on the idea of survival of the fittest. We were built on the idea that we survive as a nation. We thrive when we work together, all of us. Every race, every creed.We believe we've got a stake in each other's success, that if we attract outstanding teachers into a profession, give her the pay she deserves, the support she deserves, she's going to teach the next Steve Jobs. And we'll all end up benefiting. If we provide a faster Internet out into some rural community, that owner is going to be selling goods around the world, and he's going to be able to hire more workers. And that's going to be good for all of us.If we build that new bridge and it saves the shipping company some time and money, workers and customers all over the country will do better. That's our idea.And that idea has never been Democratic or Republican; that's an American idea. It was a Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, launched the transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Sciences, the first land-grant colleges. It was a Republican, Teddy Roosevelt, who called for a progressive income tax. Republican Dwight Eisenhower built the Interstate Highway System. There were Republicans who voted with FDR to give millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, a chance to go to college under the GI bill. This is an American idea.And you know what, here's the good news. Here's the good news. That same common purpose, that still exists today. Maybe it doesn't exist here in Washington and maybe not on the Presidential debate stage up in New Hampshire. [Laughter] But out in America, it's there. It's there when you talk to folks on Main Streets, in barbershops, in town halls. Our political parties may be divided, but most Americans, they still understand that we are greater together. No matter where we come from, we rise or fall as one Nation and one people. And that's what's at stake right now. That's what this election is about.I know this has been a tough 3 years. I know that the change we fought for in 2008, we have had to grind it out to make it happen. And after all that's been going on in Washington, all the nonsense that takes place here sometimes, it's tempting to believe, well, maybe it's not possible to do everything we wanted. But I want to remind everybody what I said in the last campaign: Real change, big change, is hard. It's always been hard. It takes more than a single term. It may take more than a single President. It takes you, ordinary citizens committed to fighting and pushing, inching this country forward bit by bit so we get closer to our highest ideals.That's how this country was built. That's how we freed ourselves from an empire. That's how the greatest generation was able to overcome more than a decade of war and depression and end up building the largest middle class in history. That's how young people beat back the billy clubs and the dogs and the fire hoses to make sure that race was no longer a barrier to what you can become in this country.Change is hard, but it's possible. I've seen it. I've lived it. And if you want to end the cynicism and the game-playing and the point-scoring here in Washington, then this is the election to send a message that you refuse to back down, you will not give up. You intend to keep hoping. You intend to keep fighting for the change that we talked about, the change that we believe in.I said in 2008--I warned you all, I said--I said I'm not a perfect man; I said I won't be a perfect President. But I promised you--I promised you this. I made a commitment to you, and I've kept this commitment. I will always tell you what I think. I always will tell you where I stand. And I wake up every single day thinking about you and fighting for you and trying to figure out how can we make sure that everybody has access to the American Dream.And if you stick with us, if you keep pushing, if we just keep on going through the setbacks, through the tough times, if you keep reaching for a vision of America that I know you still hold in your hearts, then change will continue to come. And this election may be harder than the last one, but I promise you we will finish what we started in 2008. We're going to keep on. We will press forward. We will remind the world once more why the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.Let's get to work. Thank you. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"It is wonderful to be back home! It is great to see so many friends that I haven't seen in too long, and some folks who visited me in my new residence. But let me begin by just thanking Fred for opening up this extraordinary home to us. And thank everybody else who helped put this together. I particularly want to thank Sonia and Eric for all that they did--[applause].I want to acknowledge some outstanding public servants who are here--my former seat mate in Springfield, the attorney general of Illinois--[applause]. My former teacher of the ways of the Senate and one of the finest public servants that we know, Dick Durbin. The outstanding Governor of Illinois, Pat Quinn, is in the house. And finally, we have sort of a carpetbagger here. [Laughter] I just love her, so whenever I have an excuse to see her I'm happy, and she is a fellow Midwesterner, the Senator from Missouri, Claire McCaskill.So I'm going to make my opening remarks very, very brief because--Fred and I were talking, particularly a crowd like this that knows me--I want to spend as much time as possible answering questions.I was talking about a meeting I had this morning with companies from all across the country, some of them very large corporations, Intel and Siemens, some medium-sized companies, and some very small companies. The common theme was that they were all insourcing. They were bringing jobs back to America. Many of them had located plants in China, located plants in Mexico, and because of the extraordinary growth in productivity in the United States over the last several years, because wages are going up pretty rapidly in places like China, because of energy costs and transportation costs and a whole range of other factors, we're getting to this point where when you account for everything, that America is fully competitive in manufacturing and more than competitive in services with any other country in the world. Those are a good news story.But I asked them, what is it that's going to make the biggest difference in accelerating this trend so you start seeing more and more companies decide, let's move back into the United States, let's move our plants back? And some of them mentioned education. They said the single most important reason for us to move back here is because they're more highly skilled workers here, and as long as we're investing in K through 12 and our community colleges and have enough engineers and scientists, then that's going to be a reason for us to locate here.And a number of them said the fact that we've got the most innovative research taking place in the United States, that's what's going to make a difference. And another one said, well, logistically--I think this was maybe Otis Elevators--he said it's kind of hard to move elevators around--[laughter]--and so making sure we've got the best infrastructure in the world is going to be what is the determining factor in whether or not we locate a plant here in the United States.And as I listened to each one of these companies, I was reminded that everything we've done over the last 3 years--but more importantly, everything we have to do over the next 5 years--has to be designed to making sure that this economy is once again one that is built on a solid foundation, one that is not done with bubbles, one that is not based on simply shuffling paper, but one that's based on making things and selling things and one in which everybody--business, workers, communities--all feel invested in each other.And that's what we've been trying to do over the last 3 years as we've dug ourselves out of the worst recession since the Great Depression. That's why it's been so important for us to invest in education like never before, and that's why it's been so important for us to make sure, with the help of folks like Claire and Dick, that we continue to invest in research. That's why we pushed so hard to make sure that we're rebuilding not just our roads and our bridges, but also high-speed rail lines and a faster Internet all across the country.And I make this point because as important as 2008 was, I actually think 2012 is more important, because what we're seeing developing, what we're seeing over the last 2 years--but I think what we're going to see this year in a pretty decisive way is a decision about contrasting visions about where the country should go.You've got one theory that says if we slash our education, our research, and our infrastructure budgets and weaken our social safety net and make sure that unions aren't out there operating and we essentially eliminate EPA--and I'm not exaggerating, there are candidates and Members of Congress who've called for that--that somehow we're going to be able to win this competition in the 21st century. And that's one vision, and it is being starkly stated.And I have a different vision. Most of the people in this room have a fundamentally different vision about how this country was formed. Our vision is based on the notion that everybody deserves a fair shot, everybody has to do their fair share, and everybody has got to play by the same set of rules, and America succeeds best when we're all in it together, we're all rising together. And that big, inclusive, generous, bold, ambitious vision of America is what's at stake, is what we're fighting for.But I guess in these initial remarks, what I just want to say is that many of you got involved in my campaign back in 2008, many of you got involved in my Senate campaign back in 2004, some of you got involved in my State senate campaign back in--[laughter]--I don't remember when that was. [Laughter] I think that the reason we were successful was not because I was a flawless candidate or I ran a flawless campaign, but it was because together we were able to give voice to this shared vision of what America should be. And I want you to know that I have kept faith with that vision all these years, and that's not wavered.And whether it's making a decision about getting all of our troops out of Iraq or it was making a decision about ending ""don't ask, don't tell"" or it was making a decision about expanding Pell grants so more people have access to college or it's trying to present a balanced approach to deficit reduction, what animates me continues to be the same vision that you guys helped me realize way back when.This will be my last campaign. A friend of many of us, Ab Mikva, used to say that being friends with a politician is like permanently having a child in college. [Laughter] Every year there's another tuition check. [Laughter] But I'm finally graduating. [Laughter] And I'm confident that as difficult as these last 3 years have been, as challenging as they've been--not so much for me, but for Americans all across the country who lost their jobs or have seen their home values decline or been worrying about their retirement and their 401(k)s--I absolutely believe that the American people still have confidence and faith in this country and there's a core decency and strength and resilience to be tapped and that most of the time the better angels of our nature win out. I think that's what's going to happen this time as well. But we're going to have to work hard to get it done.",2008,obama
"Hello, everybody! Oh, it is good to be home. And it is--you are right, Stuart, I see so many familiar faces. But first of all, obviously, I've got to thank the Taylor family for their wonderful hospitality. To all the folks who helped make this evening possible, I appreciate you. I just see all my neighbors. Is somebody mowing the grass in front of my house? [Laughter] I'm going to go over there and check. [Laughter] Because I don't want you guys talking about me. ""He's a good President, but nobody's mowing the lawn."" [Laughter] ""Bringing down property values."" [Laughter]A couple of people I want to acknowledge who are here. Oops, that's the wrong one. [Laughter] Hold on a second, because these folks--there we go. First of all, somebody who has been a great friend of mine, one of the finest public servants in the land, our senior Senator Dick Durbin is in the house. Dick is around here somewhere. Somebody who I knew before she got into politics as an extraordinary advocate for youth, continues to do great work--Heather Steans is here.We've got Alderman Willie Cochran is here. Where's Alderman? He's over there. Hey, Willie. And then I've got another alderman who used to work for me--[laughter]--and in my first State senate campaign was basically my only staff person. [Laughter] And now he is a big shot, but I will always remember the fact that he was there back when nobody could pronounce my name--Will Burns is in the house. Where's Will? There he is. Will Burns. It's good to see you.And then all of you are here. [Laughter] And I'm looking around, I see folks who first hired me for--as a summer associate. Between Eden and Tom, they can take--and John--they can take responsibility for me meeting Michelle. If it had not been for them, it would not have happened.I've got Allison and folks who stole me from Sidley, so you can blame them if--[laughter]--but I've got folks here who watched our kids grow up, who we played basketball together, we worked out together, we saw each other at various functions and events. And friends who, if it weren't for you, could have never gone on this extraordinary journey that I've gone on.And it's interesting, Michelle and I, we're always reflecting on the nature of the work at the White House and--whoops. That's okay. You all right? Hope that didn't break. And we could not be more privileged to be able to serve the American people and couldn't be more grateful for the opportunity they've given us. And every day is just this remarkable adventure. But I will tell you, we're not shy about saying the one thing we miss is, we don't get to see our friends as much. And as I look around this room, it's a reminder that you guys do have our backs, have continued to have our backs, and we're grateful for you and couldn't be more appreciative of everything that you've done.Now, I mentioned at a previous event, a friend of mine and a friend of some of yours, Ab Mikva, once said that having a friend who's a politician is like permanently having a child in college. [Laughter] And basically every few months a tuition check comes, and you keep on thinking, haven't they graduated yet? [Laughter] Golly. I'm still working--[laughter]--I want to remodel the kitchen and basement.Here's the good news, is we're about to graduate. This is--this will be the last campaign. [Laughter] And you know, when you think about what's at stake, I hope you end up feeling that there hasn't been a more important investment to make than the one that needs to be made this year, not just in terms of money, but in terms of time and energy and effort and enthusiasm.Back in 2008, when we first got started, I think we all had a shared vision, a common vision, of a country that came together to try to solve problems that had been put off for decades, whether it was fixing a health care system that was broken, making sure that our education system was functioning for this extraordinarily competitive 21st century, making sure that our foreign policy reflected the best of our values, dealing with energy in a way that was smart and intelligent and not only improved our economy, but also helped our environment and made sure that we could leave a planet for the next generation, an America that was inclusive and made sure that everybody had a chance to succeed.And that vision that we had, there were specific policies attached to it, but what it really came down to was this belief in an America where everybody gets a fair shot, everybody does their fair share, everybody is playing by the same set of rules, that all of us are invested in hard work and responsibility and we're all in it together. That we don't have a country in which some people are consigned to poverty because of circumstances, that if they're willing to work hard, they can do it, and we all have a responsibility to make that happen.That's what 2008 was about, and that's what the excitement was about, and that was the essence of the ""hope, change"" message, was this belief that in America, it's just different from other countries in the sense that it's diverse and everybody has a stake.And we didn't know at the time that we were going to go through the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. We didn't know that we were going to go through this extraordinary financial crisis. And so a lot of the last 3 years had been just dealing with emergencies.And they've been dealt with. And sometimes it wasn't popular. Sometimes it was risky. But we've now had an auto industry that has come surging back. We have seen private sector job growth for 22 months in a row. We are seeing the return of manufacturing to America for 2 years in a row now, some of the strongest manufacturing growth in a decade.And so there's reason to believe that we're now getting past the worst of what was a very difficult situation.But what was important to me over these last 3 years was that we also didn't lose sight of the things that had gotten me into this race in the first place, that we still worked on some of those long-term challenges.And so we fought for health care. Because unless we could honestly say that nobody in this country is going bankrupt because they get sick, unless we could say that if you're working hard and you're carrying out your responsibilities, you shouldn't have to worry about whether an insurance company drops you or whether as a young person getting started off in life, that you're going to have some assurance that you've got health care coverage, that we're not living up to that vision that got us--that got me into this race. And so we got it done.The first bill I signed, a bill that said that we're going to have equal pay for equal work because I want my daughters treated the same way as my sons. We got that done.Making sure that college was accessible. We made sure that we took $60 billion that were going through banks as a pass-through for student loan programs, and we said, let's use that $60 billion and expand Pell grants and make student loans more accessible so that millions of young people have opportunity all across the country.And if we're going to deal seriously with energy, we've got to get started now, even though we still have an economic crisis, especially because we've got an economic crisis. So we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars and on trucks. And we made sure that we didn't have any more regulations than were necessary to keep our air clean and our water clean, but we were going to enforce those laws to make sure that we're leaving a planet behind for our kids and grandkids that is at least as clean as the one that we inherited.And we said that we're going to have to end this war in Iraq, and we did. And we said that there are certain values that we're not going to back off of, like making sure that if you want to serve this country that you love, you don't have to answer for who you love. And we ended ""don't ask, don't tell.""And so there were just--there were a series of things that met a lot of resistance, lot of the lobbyists opposed, that at times caused controversy. But 3 years into it, we can honestly say that the vision that motivated me to run, the vision that motivated you to work so hard, that we've been true to that vision.Now, we still have a lot more work to do. We've got a lot more unfinished business. I was mentioning at a previous event I was at--I had a forum this morning with CEOs, some from very large companies like Intel, some from medium-sized companies, some from very small companies. The common theme was they were all bringing jobs back from China and Mexico. They decided to relocate back in the United States.Now they were making this not out of a charitable decision. [Laughter] They were making this decision because American workers continue to be the most productive in the world and their productivity has shot up even in the midst of this recession, that our research and our innovation remains unparalleled around the world. And they started figuring out, you know what, it might actually be cheaper for us and more productive for us to create jobs here in the United States.The interesting thing, though, was--is that when you asked them what more can we do to encourage this trend, every one of them said we still have to have a better education system; we need to make an investment in that. Every one of them said we've got to make sure we've got the best infrastructure in the world, and we've been falling behind. Every one of them said that we've got to have a smart energy policy.Every one of them said that we've got to maintain our primacy in research and science and technology. And that was gratifying, because I said, well, that's my agenda. [Laughter] That's what I've been fighting for. And that's what this year's debate is going to be about. It's going to be about not only consolidating the extraordinary achievements that we've been able to get done thanks to you over the last 3 years, making sure that health care reform is implemented and financial regulatory reform is implemented and we don't have a rollback of our environmental protections. Those are all important things.But what we're also going to be debating is are we going to pursue a vision that says our only way to compete in this world is to slash spending on education and slash spending on research and development and not upgrade our infrastructure and take away worker protections and just kind of see how we do in a race to the bottom. Or are we going to pursue a vision that says we're going to continue to have the best scientists and universities, but we're also going to get down into K through 12 and community colleges and we're going to train our young people, and we're going to invest in human capital, and we're going to have the best infrastructure. And there's no conflict between environment and economics because we're going to continue to make sure that we're at the cutting edge on advanced vehicles and electric cars.That vision of a future that is inclusive and forward looking, that's what we're fighting for. Now, we've still got a difficult economy, and that's why this is still going to be a close race. I've got to tell you that if we weren't coming out of this extraordinary recession, I think the American people would make their decision very quickly.But we've gone through 3 tough years. And the other side has been able to just sit on the sidelines and say no to everything, not cooperate, and then simply try to point the finger and say that somehow this should have been fixed. And I understand that. That's politics. That's how Washington generally works. And so this is going to be a tough battle, and I'm going to need all of you just as much now, more now, than I needed you in 2008.But the main message I've got is that if you guys are willing to invest the same kind of blood, sweat, and tears as we invested in 2008, I'm confident we're going to win. And the reason I'm confident is that common vision of ours is one that's shared all across the country. I rose to national prominence by a speech that said there is no red--there are no red States and no blue States; it was the United States of America. Now, sometimes people say, ah, well, you learned, didn't you? [Laughter] You go to Washington, and you'll find out.But that's Washington. That's not America. And when I travel around the country--I don't care whether I'm going to a tiny town or a big city, I don't care whether I'm talking to Black people or White people or Latinos or Native Americans or Asian Americans. Wherever I go, I still hear and see on display that core decency and common sense and confidence in the future and belief in community that I was talking about way back when. Making that real, translating that into policy, getting it through Congress, signing these things into laws, that's tough. It's not easy.But the animating spirit? That's still there. And I am just as determined as I ever was--more determined with all that I've seen over the last several years--more determined than ever to make sure that we've got a Government that is reflective of those values. That's what we're fighting for.And if you guys stand with me, if you guys have my back as you guys have had my back for all these years, I guarantee you that we are going to win this election. We will deliver for the American people. And I won't be back here in that house for another 5 years. [Laughter]All right? Thank you very much, everybody. God bless you. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Chicago! Thank you! Thank you so much.Audience member. Hello!The President. Hello! Oh, it's good to be home. It is good to be home. No place like it.It is great to see so many old friends. I don't mean in years, although you guys are getting older, some of you. I'll be honest with you, I wouldn't mind popping over to the United Center. I think the Bulls are playing tonight. They are off to a fine start. You might have heard the Dallas Mavericks came to the White House on Monday to celebrate their championship, and I told them, enjoy it, because the Bulls will be here next year. That's what I said.I want to thank Jessica----Audience member. [Inaudible] The President. [Laughter] I want to thank Jessica for sharing her extraordinary story. And Jessica is so representative of all the folks who did so much 4 years ago and are doing so much now. So give her a big round of applause. We are appreciative of her.I want to thank Janelle Monae for her wonderful performance. Her whole crew is here. We had them at the state dinner, and the Korean President and his whole family, they were moving around and--[laughter]. You remember that? Oh, they loved it. So music is the universal language, and Janelle and her team are incredibly talented.I want to thank my dear friend. He and I went to law school together; he decided to make something of his life. [Laughter] You see him on TV all the time. Hill Harper is in the house. Thank you, Hill.One of the finest public servants and one of the finest Senators in the land, Dick Durbin is here. Thank you, Dick. Two of the finest Members of Congress in the land, and great friends, Danny Davis and Jan Schakowsky, and we've got Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle, who is here as well.Now, I also want to say a special word about a friend of ours, a man who's done extraordinary work for me and performed extraordinary service for our country over the past year, and that is Bill Daley, who--[applause]. Now, first of all, Bill and I, we got off the plane, and we said, is it really 45 degrees in January? [Laughter] So we were a little confused, thought we had landed in the wrong place. [Laughter] But when Bill first told me it was time for him to return to our hometown, I asked him to take a couple days to reconsider. But it is tough to resist the greatest city in the world. And as much as I will miss him in the White House, he's going to be an extraordinary asset to our campaign. He's going to be helping us win in 2012. So I just want to publicly say how much I appreciate him.Now, I also want to say how much I appreciate you.Audience member. We love you!The President. I love you.Audience members. We love you!The President. I love you too.Audience member. I love you!The President. I love you back, man. [Laughter] You know, I'm here not just because I need your help, but I'm also here because the country needs your help. There was a reason why so many people like Jessica worked your hearts out in our 2008 campaign. And it wasn't because you thought it was going to be easy. When you support a guy named Barack Hussein Obama--[laughter]--for President of the United States, you've got to assume that the odds may not be in your favor. [Laughter] You didn't need a poll to know that it wasn't a sure thing.But what you understood was that the campaign was not about me. It was about our common vision for America. It wasn't a cramped, narrow vision of an America where everybody is left to fend for themselves and the most powerful are able to play by their own rules. It was a vision of a big and compassionate and ambitious and bold America where everybody has a chance to get ahead: everybody, not just those who are advantaged. A vision that says we're greater together than we are on our own. A vision where everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and there's a sense of fair play, that the rules apply to everybody.That's the vision we shared. That's the change we believed in. And we knew it wouldn't come easy, and we knew it wouldn't come quickly. But I'm here to tell you that 3 years later, because of what you did in 2008, we've begun to see what change looks like.Change--we've begun to see--and sometimes, because things are moving so fast and the media moves from thing to thing to thing, we don't take time to step back and ask ourselves what happened because of the work you did in 2008.Change is the first bill I signed into law, a law that says an equal day's work should mean an equal day's pay, because our daughters should be treated the same and have the same opportunities as our sons. That's what change is.Change is the decision we made--that was unpopular at the time--to go in and help the auto industry retool, prevent its collapse, even when you had a lot of folks who said we should just let Detroit go bankrupt. And as a consequence, we saved 1 million jobs, and local businesses are picking up again, and fuel-efficient cars are rolling off the assembly line stamped with three proud words--Made in America--and the automakers are back, and folks are working. That's because of you. Change is the decision we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our oil addiction and go ahead and raise fuel efficiency standards on cars. And by the next decade, we'll be driving cars that get 55 miles to a gallon. That's what change is. Save us billions of barrels of oil and save consumers billions of dollars from their pocketbooks, and it means that we'll have a better chance of making sure that we leave the planet a little bit cleaner and a little bit better off for our kids.And change is the fight we had, and the fight we won, to stop handing out $60 billion in taxpayer subsidies to banks that issue student loans and give that money directly to students so that millions of more young people are able to get the kind of education that they need in this 21st-century economy. That's what change is.And as Jessica pointed out, change is finally, after a century of talking about it, passing health care reform that ensures that in the United States of America nobody goes bankrupt because they get sick. And 2.5 million young people already have health insurance because they can stay on their parent's plan. And nobody is denied coverage or dropped by their insurance company when they need it most. That's what change is.Change is the fact that for the first time in our history, you don't have to hide who you love in order to serve the country you love. That's what change is. ""Don't ask, don't tell"" is over.And change is keeping one of the first promises I made back in 2008, and that is ending the war in Iraq and bringing our troops home so we can focus our attention on rebuilding America.Focus our attention on rebuilding America, but also focusing our efforts on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11. And thanks to the brave men and women in uniform, Al Qaida is weaker than it has ever been and Usama bin Laden will never walk this Earth again. Now, these changes weren't easy. Some were risky. Almost all of them came in the face of fierce opposition, powerful lobbyists, special interests who spent millions trying to maintain the status quo. And not all the steps we took were politically popular at the time, certainly not politically popular with the crowd in Washington.But you know, what kept me going is you. See, I remembered all the work you put in. I remembered your hopes and your dreams. And I knew that on every one of these fights, you guys were out there making your voices heard, knocking on doors, making phone calls, keeping up the fight for change long after the election was over.And that should make you proud. It should make you hopeful. It shouldn't make you complacent. It shouldn't make you satisfied, because everything that we fought for is now at stake in this election. The very core of what this country stands for is on the line, the basic promise that no matter who you are, where you come from, this is a place where you can make it if you try. That's at stake in this election.The crisis that struck in the months before I took office put more Americans out of work than at any time since the Great Depression. But it was also a culmination of a decade of neglect, a decade where the middle class fell further behind and more jobs in manufacturing left our shores. And suddenly, our prosperity was built on risky financial deals and homes that we couldn't afford. And we racked up greater debt. Even as incomes fell, wages flatlined, the cost of everything from college and health care kept on going through the roof.And those problems built up over a decade, in some cases more. They didn't happen overnight. We knew we couldn't solve them overnight. It's going to take more than a few years to meet the challenges that have been decades in the making. And the American people understand that.What they don't understand are leaders who refuse to take action. What they're sick and tired of is watching people who are supposed to represent them put their party ahead of the country, put the next election ahead of the next generation. That's what they don't understand.President Kennedy used to say that after he took office, what surprised him most about Washington was it was just as bad as he had said it was. [Laughter]I can relate to that. [Laughter] When you've got the top Republican saying his number-one priority isn't creating more jobs, isn't solving the health care problems, isn't making sure that we're competitive in the 21st century, but is to beat me, then you know things aren't on the level. That's how you end up with Republicans in Congress voting against all kinds of proposals that they--even proposals they supported in the past: tax cuts for workers, tax cuts for small businesses, rebuilding roads, bridges, putting cops and teachers back to work. Suddenly, they're opposed.They'll fight with their last breath to protect tax cuts for the most fortunate of Americans, but they'll play political games with tax cuts for the middle class. I guess they thought it was a smart political strategy, but it's sure not a strategy to create jobs. It's not a strategy to strengthen the middle class or help people who are trying to get into the middle class to get there. It's not a strategy to help America succeed.So we've got a clear choice this year. The question is not whether people are still hurting, the economy is still recovering. Of course, folks are still hurting. We've got a long way to go. The question is what are we going to do about it, where are we going to go, what direction does this country move towards.The Republicans in Congress, the Presidential candidates who are running, they've got a very specific idea about where they want to take this country. I mean, they've said it. They said they want to reduce the deficit by gutting our investments in education and gutting our investments in research and technology, letting our infrastructure further deteriorate.Now, my attitude is, I've already signed a trillion dollars' worth of spending cuts; I proposed even more. It's time, when we're talking about reducing the deficit, to also ask people like me to pay our fair share in taxes. We can do that. We can have a system in which folks who have been incredibly blessed by this Nation do a little bit more so that the next generation is able to get on the ladder of success.The Republicans in Congress and on the campaign trail, they want to make Medicare a form of private insurance, where seniors have to shop with a voucher, and it may not cover all their costs. I think we can lower the cost of Medicare, but still guarantee the dignified retirement that our seniors have earned. They've earned it. They've earned it.When I hear some of them talk about, oh, this is just an entitlement. These folks earned it. They worked hard. They paid into it.This crowd, they think the best way for America to compete for new jobs and businesses is to follow other countries in a race to the bottom. They figure, well, since China pays really low wages, let's roll back the minimum wage here and bust unions; since some of these other countries allow corporations to pollute as much as they want, let's get rid of protections that help make sure our air is clean and our water is safe.Audience member. Go EPA!The President. Yes. You know--now, I don't think we should have any more regulations than what are necessary for our health and safety. And we've made reforms that will make sure that businesses save billions of dollars. We want government that is smart and efficient and lean. And by the way, we've issued fewer regulations than the Bush administration. They've been better regulations. [Laughter]But I don't believe in a race to the bottom. I think we should be in a race to the top. We should be competing to make sure we've got the best schools. We should be competing to make sure we've got the most highly trained workers. We should make sure that a college education is within reach for everybody.We should be in a race to make sure our businesses have the best access to the fastest Internet, the fastest railroads, the best airports. I want a race where we got--we continue to have the best scientists and researchers, making the next breakthroughs in medicine and clean energy. I want to make sure that happens right here in America. That's the race we can win.We should be in a race to make sure the next generation of manufacturing takes root not in Asia, not in Europe, but right here in Chicago, in Detroit, in Pittsburgh, in Cleveland, in Charlotte, in Nashville.I don't want this Nation to be known for what we buy, what we consume. I want us to be known for building and selling products all around the world.And you know it's possible. I had a meeting this morning with CEOs from--some of them very big companies like Intel, some of them small manufacturers. They're starting to bring jobs back to the United States. They've started to figure out that, yes, some of these countries may have lower wages, but when you factor in all the costs and quality and the productivity of American workers, that it actually makes sense to build plants here. And they're moving plants back from China and plants back from Mexico, because they know that businesses who succeed here will succeed anywhere.But what they also said was we can only come here if we know that we've got the best workers. And that means the education system has to work. We can't come here if we don't think that the Internet and our roads and our transportation infrastructure is the best in the world.The competition for new jobs, for businesses, for middle class security, that's a race I know we can win. But America is not going to win if we give in to those who think that we can only respond to our challenges with the same tired old tune, just hand out more tax cuts to folks who don't need them and weren't even asking for them, let companies do whatever they want, hope that prosperity somehow trickles down on everybody else's head.It doesn't work. It didn't work when it was tried in the decade before the Great Depression. It's not what led to the incredible postwar boom in the fifties and the sixties. It didn't work when we tried it under the previous President, and it's not going to work now.We cannot go back to this brand of you're-on-your-own economics. We believe that everybody has a stake in each other and that if we attract an outstanding teacher to the profession by giving her the pay and training and support that she needs, she'll go out and educate the next Steve Jobs. And suddenly, a whole new industry will blossom.And we believe that if you provide rural--faster Internet to some little town out in rural America, that store owner now suddenly has a whole world marketplace. And if we build a new bridge that saves a shipping company time and money, then workers and customers all over the country are going to do better. And if we invest in basic science and research, that the next new thing will be invented.And so instead of listening to Janelle on the iPod--who knows what the next thing is, but it will be because we have invested in the innovation that makes us the greatest nation on Earth.Now, this has never been a Democratic idea or a Republican idea. This isn't a partisan idea. It was a Republican President from Illinois named Abraham Lincoln who launched the transcontinental railroad and the National Academy of Sciences and the first land-grant colleges. Teddy Roosevelt called for a progressive income tax; he was a Republican. Dwight Eisenhower built the Interstate Highway System, invested in boosting our science and math and engineering education here in this country. It was with the help of Republicans that FDR helped millions of people--returning heroes, including my grandfather--get a chance to go college on the GI bill. This should not be a partisan idea.And that same spirit of common purpose, it still exists today. It may not exist in Washington. But out in America, when you talk to people on main streets and in town halls, they'll tell you, we still believe in those values. Our political parties may be divided, but most Americans, they understand, no, we're in this together. We rise and fall together as one Nation, as one people.That's what's at stake right now. That's what this election is about. So, Chicago, yes, it has been 3 tough years. There are times where the changes we want didn't come as fast as we wanted. And after all the noise in Washington, I know it's tempting to believe sometimes that, gosh, maybe change isn't possible.But remember what we said during the last campaign: Yes, we can.We said real change and big change isn't easy. I warned you it was going to take time. I said it was going to take more than a year, maybe more than one term. Some of it's going to take more than one President. It takes ordinary citizens who keep fighting, keep pushing, keep inching this country closer and closer and closer to our ideals.That's how the greatest generation overcame a decade of depression and ended up building the largest middle class in the history of the world. That's how young people beat back billy clubs and fire hoses and ensured that their kids could grow up in a country where you can be anything, including the President of the United States.Change is hard, but it is possible. I've seen it. You've seen it. We have lived it. And if you want to end the cynicism and stop the game playing that passes for politics these days and you want to send a message about what is possible, then you can't back down. Not now.We won't give up. Not now.You've got to send a message. We are going to keep pushing and fighting for the change that we believe in.I've said before, I am not a perfect man. I'm not a perfect President. But I've promised you this, and I've kept this promise: I will always tell you what I believe, I will always tell you where I stand. I will wake up every single day thinking about how I can make this country better, and I will spend every ounce of energy that I have fighting for you.So, if you've still got that energy, if you're still fired up, if you are not weary, if you're ready to put on your walking shoes and get to work and knock on some doors and make some phone calls and talk to your friends and talk to your neighbors and push through all the obstacles and keep reaching for that vision that you hold in your hearts, I promise you change will come.If you're willing to work even harder in this election than you did in that last election, I promise you change will come. If you stick with me, we're going to finish what we started in 2008. We will remind this country and we will remind the world just why we are the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you, Chicago. I love you. God bless the United States of America. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, New York! Hello, New York! Hello, Harlem! Oh, it is good to be here tonight!Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. All right.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. Thank you. Thank you so much.I want to begin by just thanking Ny for the incredible introduction and being such a great mom. And we're so proud of her. Thank you. I want to thank our emcee, Lin-Manuel Miranda. We appreciate you.I want to thank the incredible performers this evening; one of my favorites, India Arie in the house. There she is. I love India.And then, to know that Reverend Al Green was here----[At this point, the President sang as follows.]The President. ""I""--[applause]--""so in love with you."" [Applause]You--those guys didn't think I would do it. I told you I was going to do it. [Laughter] The Sandman did not come out. I--now, don't worry, Rev, I cannot sing like you. But I did--I just wanted to show my appreciation. [Laughter]I also want to acknowledge a couple of outstanding Members of Congress with us here today: Congressman Charlie Rangel and Congressman Jerry Nadler are in the house.All right, you guys, have a seat. I've got something to say.Audience member. Thank you, Mr. President.The President. Thank you. No, thank you. Because I am here tonight not just because I need your help, I'm here because your country needs your help.There was a reason why so many of you got involved in the campaign in 2008, worked your hearts out. And it wasn't because you thought it was going to be easy. When you decide to support somebody named Barack Hussein Obama for President, you're not doing it because you think it's a cakewalk. [Laughter]You did it because you understood the campaign wasn't about me. It was about a vision that we shared for America. A vision that wasn't narrow and cramped. It wasn't an idea that in America you just look out for yourself and the most powerful among us can just play by their own rules. It was a vision that was big and compassionate and bold, and it said, in America, if you work hard, you've got a chance. You've got a chance to get ahead. Doesn't matter where you were born. It doesn't matter what you look like. It doesn't matter what your name is. If you're willing to work hard, if you've got some talent, some idea, if you're motivated, you can make it.And it was a vision that said we're greater together than we are on our own, that when everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody's playing by the same set of rules, then we all do better. We all do better.That's the vision we shared. That was the change we believed in. And we knew it wasn't going to come easy. We knew it wouldn't come quickly. We knew there would be resistance. We knew there would be setbacks. But because of what you did in 2008, we've started to see concrete examples of that change.Think about it. Change is the first bill I signed into law that enshrines a very simple proposition: You get an equal day's pay for an equal's day work, because we want our daughters treated just as well as our sons. That's what change is.Change is the decision we made to rescue the auto industry from collapse, even when there were folks saying no and wanted to let Detroit go bankrupt. And now, 1 million jobs were saved and local businesses have picked up again and GM is once again the largest auto company in the world. And we are seeing cars rolling off those assembly lines stamped with three proud words: Made in America.Change is the decision we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our oil addiction and finally raised our fuel efficiency standards on our cars so that by the next decade, every car is going to be getting 55 miles per gallon. That will save you money. That will save our environment. It's good for our national security. That's what change is. We got that done.Change was the fight that we had to stop sending $60 billion in unnecessary subsidies to the banks in the student loan program, take that $60 billion out, give it directly to the students so that millions of young people all across America are able to afford a college education. That's change.Change is the health care reform bill that we passed after a century of trying that says, if you get sick in America, you will not go bankrupt. And we've already got 2 1/2 million young people with health insurance who didn't have it and seniors getting help on their prescription drugs. And Americans won't be denied coverage because of preexisting conditions or insurance companies dropping them right when they need the care most. That's what change is.Change is the fact that for the first time in our history, you don't have to hide who you love in order to serve this country that you love. ""Don't ask, don't tell"" is over. We don't believe in discrimination in this country. That's part of who we are. That's what change is.And change is keeping one of the first promises I made in 2008. We ended the war in Iraq, and we brought our troops home. And in the meantime, we refocused our efforts on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11. And thanks to the extraordinary men and women in our--in uniform and our intelligence agencies, Al Qaida is weaker than it's ever been and Usama bin Laden will never walk this Earth again. That's what change is.Now, you guys have been paying attention. None of this has been easy. Some of it was risky. We were opposed by lobbyists and special interests. Millions of dollars were spent trying to maintain the status quo. And a lot of the things we did weren't always popular at the time, certainly not with the crowd in Washington.But part of the reason we were able to get it done is because of you, because I knew that all across America your voices were still being heard. You guys were still knocking on doors. You were making phone calls. You were rooting for us, because you understood that as hard as this was, it was consistent with the vision that we campaigned so hard to bring about.You kept up the fight long after the election was over. And that should make you proud. And it should make you hopeful. It shouldn't make you complacent, it shouldn't make you satisfied, because everything we did over the last 3 years is now at stake in this election. The very core of what this country stands for, that idea that no matter who you are, you can make it, that idea that we're all in it together, the idea that if there's a child somewhere who's not getting a good education, that affects me, the idea that if there's a senior somewhere losing her home, that affects me, that idea is at stake in this election.The crisis that struck in the months before I took office put more Americans out of work than any time since the Great Depression. We've got a chart that shows in the months right before I took office, 4 million jobs lost; the months right after I took office, another 4 million, before our economic policies had a chance to take effect.We've been growing ever since. We've been adding jobs ever since. But this was a profound crisis. But it was also a culmination of a decade where middle class families fell further and further behind and more and more good jobs, manufacturing jobs, left our shores. And suddenly, our prosperity was built on risky financial deals or homes we couldn't afford or everybody running up their credit cards. And we racked up greater and greater debt, and incomes fell, and wages flatlined, and the cost of everything from college to health care to food went through the roof.These problems didn't happen overnight; we weren't going to solve them overnight. It's going to take more than a few years to meet the challenges that have been decades in the making. The American people understand that. What they don't understand is leaders who refuse to take action. They're sick and tired of watching people who are supposed to represent them put party ahead of country or the next election before the next generation.President Kennedy had a--once said, after he took office, he said, the thing that surprised him most about Washington was that it was as bad as he had been saying it was. [Laughter] I can relate to that. [Laughter] You've got the top Republican in the Senate who said his top priority was beating me. [Laughter] That's his top priority.My top priority is putting Americans back to work. My top priority is making sure our kids are getting a good education. My top priority is making sure that everybody has affordable, accessible health care. His top priority is beating me. That shows you things aren't in--on the level. That's how you end up with the Republicans in Congress voting against proposals that they used to support.You saw them in December all tied up in knots because we were proposing tax cuts for workers and small businesses, and they always said they were the party of tax cuts. Suddenly--[laughter]--didn't know what to do. Proposals to rebuild roads and bridges, that didn't used to be a Democratic issue. It used to be we understood building America was good for America--putting cops and teachers back to work, back in the classroom, back on the streets. They will fight with everything they have to protect tax cuts for me, for the wealthiest Americans, and then suddenly, they get confused when it comes to tax cuts for the middle class.Now, maybe they thought this was smart political strategy. Maybe they thought it would advance Mitch McConnell's agenda to beat me. But it's not a strategy to create jobs. It's not a strategy to strengthen our middle class. It's not a strategy to help America succeed.So we've got a choice this year. It's--we have not seen a choice this stark in years. I mean, even in 2008, the Republican nominee wasn't a climate change denier. [Laughter] He was in favor of immigration reform. He was opposed to torture. [Laughter]The contrast this year could not be sharper. So the question is not whether people are still hurting; people are still hurting profoundly. A lot of folks out there still out of work looking for work. The question is, what do we do about it? The debate that we need to have in this election is about where do we go from here.The Republicans in Congress, the candidates running for President, they've got a very specific idea about where they want to take this country. They want to reduce--[laughter]--they want to reduce the deficit by gutting our investments in education, by gutting our investments in research and technology, by letting our roads and our bridges and our airports deteriorate.I've already signed a trillion dollars' worth of spending cuts, proposed even more. And I think it's time for us to reduce the deficit by asking those of us who are most fortunate to pay their fair share--to pay their fair share.And by the way, let me just say this, because I've been hearing a lot of these Republicans talking about, oh, that's class warfare, and he just wants to redistribute and doesn't believe in work, and he's trying to create an entitlement society, and this and that and the other. Let me be absolutely clear: I should pay more taxes and folks in my income bracket should pay more taxes and certainly folks who are making billions of dollars should pay more taxes not because I want to take their money and just give it to somebody else. It's because we've got basic investments and basic functions that have to be carried out in this 21st century if we're going to be able to compete.We're going to have to train our young people so that they can get the high-skilled jobs of the future. We're going to have to make sure that we've got the best broadband lines and the best infrastructure to move products and services. We're going to have to make sure that we have the basic science and technology research that allows us to stay on the cutting edge of innovation, because other countries are making these investments and they're catching up.And if we are going to do all that without leaving a mountain of debt for our kids, while still maintaining the strongest military on Earth, while still making sure that Social Security and Medicare are there for future generations, that our seniors are protected, then all of us have to do our part.That is--should not be a Democratic idea or a Republican idea. That should be an American idea. It's about responsibility. It's about taking responsibility for the country. And when all of us take responsibility, we all do better. That's the idea.The Republicans in Congress and on the campaign trail, these guys running for President--[laughter]--want to--why do you laugh? They're running for President. [Laughter] They are. And they want to take Medicare and make it a form of private insurance, of--so that seniors shop around with a voucher, even if it doesn't cover the costs of their medicine or their care.Now, I think that we can lower the cost--we have to lower the cost of Medicare with reforms that still guarantee a dignified retirement for seniors, because they've earned it. These folks act like this is an entitlement that was unearned. Folks paid into this system. They worked hard to have some sense of security. Our reforms should reflect that.They think the best way for America to compete for new jobs and businesses is to follow other countries in a race to the bottom. So they say, well, look, if--China lets you pay low wages, so they want to roll back our minimum wage or our right to collectively bargain. They say, well, if companies can pollute in some of these other countries, so they want to get rid of protections that ensure we have clean air and clean water.Look, we should not have any more regulation than is required for the health and safety of the American people. Nobody likes redtape. Nobody likes bureaucracy. That's why I actually--I've reformed Government so that we initiated fewer regulations than the previous administration, with a lot more benefit, much lower costs relative to the benefits, looking to streamline Government. We're saving businesses billions of dollars in reduced paperwork. So we are not interested in regulation for regulation's sake. But I do not believe in this notion that we should have a race to the bottom. That shouldn't be what we're competing for.We should be competing to win that race to the top. We should be competing to make our schools the best in the world. We should be competing to make sure that our workers have the best skills and the best training so they get the best pay. We should be making sure that college is within reach of everybody.We should be in a race to give our businesses the best roads and airports. We should be in a race to support the scientists and the researchers that create the next clean energy breakthrough or the medicine that might cure pernicious diseases. We should be in a race to make sure that the next generation of manufacturing doesn't take root in Asia or in Germany, but takes root in Detroit and in Pittsburgh and in Cleveland and in New York. I don't want this to be a nation that just buys and consumes and borrows. I want us to be known for building and selling all over the world.And that's a race--this competition for middle class security, for advanced technology, for having the best workers in the world--this is a race I know we can win. But America is not going to win if we do the same things, if we respond to our economic challenges with the same old, tired ""cut taxes for wealthy people, let companies do whatever they want even if it's harming other folks, and somehow prosperity is going to trickle down to everybody else.""Look, we tried that. [Laughter] I don't know if you remember, but we tried that. It never worked. It didn't work when it was tried in the decade before the Great Depression. It's not what led to the incredible boom in the fifties and the sixties that created the greatest middle class on Earth. It did not work back in 2001 and 2 and 3 and 4 and 5 and 6--[laughter]--where we had the slowest job growth of any decade.We can't go back to this brand of you're-on-your-own economics. I believe we've got a stake in everybody's success. If we can attract outstanding teachers by giving her the pay and the support and the training she deserves, she is going to educate the next Steve Jobs. And not only will we have whatever the next iPad is, but we'll also all see the economy grow.If we provide faster Internet service to some rural business somewhere and now suddenly they have access to the entire global market, or some business right here in Harlem that's selling something that previously they could only sell in a few blocks and now they can sell it anywhere, that means suddenly they can start hiring more workers. They've got customers now all over the world. Countries will do better--our whole country will do better.This is not a Democratic idea or a Republican idea. Abraham Lincoln, first Republican President, he understood this, launched the transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Scientists--or of Sciences, the first land-grant college, all while dealing with a Civil War--a Republican.Teddy Roosevelt called for a progressive income tax, because he understood that you can't pretend you're for equality of opportunity when you have huge inequality and you're not creating ladders for success for people--a Republican.Dwight Eisenhower built the Interstate Highway System, invested in math and science education so we could compete in the race to space--Republican.There were Republicans in Congress that supported FDR giving millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, the chance to go college on the GI bill. That idea is as old as this country.And you know, that idea, it's still there. That sense of common purpose, it's still there. We tapped into it in 2008, and it's still out there all across the country. I see it everywhere I go. It may not be in Washington, it may not be in Congress, but it's out there. You talk to folks on Main Streets, town halls, VFW halls, barbershops, they understand this. Our politics may be divided, but people understand we're all in this together. They understand that no matter who we are, we rise or fall as one Nation and as one people.And that's what's at stake right now. That's what this election is about.Now, I know these have been 3 tough years. I know that some of the change folks wanted hasn't come as fast as people hoped for. I know that after all the stuff that has gone on in Washington, it's tempting sometimes to just say, you know what, it's not possible, the system's broken, we give up. That's tempting. But remember what I used to say in the last campaign. I said this--I repeated it over and over again: Real change, big change, it's hard. It takes time. It takes more than a single term. It takes more than a single President.What it takes is ordinary citizens like you who just keep on fighting, keep pushing, keep inching the country closer and closer and closer to our ideals. That's how the greatest generation defeated fascism and yanked us out of a great depression and built the largest middle class in history. That's how young people from every background were able to suffer billy clubs and firehoses to ensure that our children grew up in a country where your race is no barrier to what you can become.I mean, change is hard, but we know it's possible. We've seen it. I've lived it. I've lived it. I've seen it.And so, as we go into this election year, I want everybody to understand, yes, my hair is grayer, yes, we've got some dings and some dents, and yes, this financial crisis has been a wakeup call. But you know what, there is no other country that doesn't envy our position. They understand that this country is still that last, best hope. And they are counting--the world is counting and our fellow citizens are counting on us not giving up, not giving in to despair.If you want to end the cynicism and the game-playing and the point-scoring and the sound bites that pass for politics these days, then you've got to send a message this year, starting right now, that you refuse to back down, that you will not give up, that you intend to keep hoping and keep pushing and keep fighting just as hard as you did 4 years ago. You are going to keep believing in change.And if you are willing to do that, if you are going to work just as hard, if you're able to generate that same passion and commitment, then I'll be there next to you. Because I've often said--I said in 2008, I'm not a perfect man. I'm not a perfect President. But I promise you that I've kept that promise I made to you in 2008: I would always tell you what I thought, I would always tell you where I stood, and I would wake up every single day fighting as hard as I can for you.I am just as determined now as I was then. And if you are willing to stand alongside me, we will knock those obstacles out of the way. We will reach for that vision of America that we believe in in our hearts, and change will come. If you will work harder than you did last time, change will come. If you keep on believing, we'll finish what we started in 2008. Change will come. If you fight with me and press on with me, I promise you change will come. And we will remind everybody just why it is that the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"The President. I am so thrilled to be here, not only because of the extraordinary hospitality of Spike and Tonya and Jackson and Satchel, but also because I see a lot of good friends around the room. And so I just want to thank you in advance for everything that you've done in the past and everything that I know you're committed to doing this year.Tonya, I saw ""Bamboozled"" a while back. [Laughter]Filmmaker Spike Lee. Sleep and eat!Tonya L. Lee. Sometimes, you got to wonder. [Laughter]The President. Some of you may not remember that film, which is okay. [Laughter] On the other hand, I prefer to tell the story, which I told when you guys hosted us in Martha's Vineyard, about a little-known fact--I'm not sure this has been reported by the press--that on my first official date with Michelle, I took Michelle to see ""Do the Right Thing,"" first official date.Mr. Lee. You remember what I said?The President. Yes.Mr. Lee. I said, good thing you didn't choose ""Driving Miss Daisy."" [Laughter]The President. That's true. Spike wasn't maybe quite as famous, as the movie had just come out, and I was showing my sophistication in selecting this independent filmmaker, and she was impressed. And I think----Mr. Lee. Glad to help you. [Laughter]The President. I'm just saying, I think you helped me out that day. [Laughter] So it worked out, which is why I've always had a soft spot for Spike Lee in my heart. What I've also always enjoyed is Spike serving as a foil for my Chicago Bulls--[laughter]--year after year after year after year. [Laughter]But these guys, it's true, they have been great friends ever since I started this incredible journey in politics on the national scene. And to see their incredibly accomplished and good-looking children and to see how well Tonya has done with her writing, it's just wonderful.So thank you so much for hosting this----Mr. Lee. Thank you.The President. ----spectacular event.I'm going to be very brief so that we have some time for questions and conversation. We're obviously at a historic moment in this country's history. We're coming off of the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, an economic contraction of the likes that we haven't seen in our lifetime. Around the world there are transformations taking place in the Middle East, in Eastern Europe, and Asia that are extraordinarily challenging.But this is also a moment of great promise. And what we've tried to do over the last 3 years is to not only solve a crisis, not only make sure that we didn't tip into a Great Depression and started getting economic growth going again and jobs growing again--we've now had 22 straight months of private sector job growth and the economy is on the mend, although not where it needs to be; not only have we been able to end a war in Iraq and start managing a transition in Afghanistan; not only have we passed historic health care legislation that's already having an impact on 2.5 million young people who have health insurance as we speak because of that law, and been able to end practices like ""don't ask, don't tell,"" that were so fundamentally contrary to who we are as a country, but what we've also tried to do is begin to lay the foundation to deal with problems that have been building up for decades.An education system that is still not where it needs to be to make sure that our young people can compete in the 21st century, making sure that we have a Tax Code that is fair and equitable so that hard-working Americans don't feel like other folks are playing by a different set of rules, making sure that our financial system is stable and conducive to economic growth, as opposed to just speculation and arbitrage.And so what we've also tried to do is to take a long view about where America needs to be in order for us to succeed in this 21st century, not for us--everybody in this room is going to be doing fine--but for children and grandchildren and future generations who are going to be able to proudly say that America continues to be the land of opportunity, and it continues to be the one indispensable nation around the world that people look to for leadership and clarity of values.I couldn't be prouder of the track record we've established over the last 3 years. But we've got a lot more work to do. And the only way we're going to accomplish it is to win this election. We could not have a sharper contrast this year than is going to be presented. And if some of you want to wander off to watch the debate--[laughter].Audience member. No, thank you!The President. If you need some motivation--[laughter]--feel free. Because the country actually is not as divided as Washington is. I think people still are looking for commonsense solutions. I think people believe that we can have economic growth and make sure that the ladders of upward mobility are still there for everybody. I think people believe that we can be tough on those who would try to do us harm, but still abide by due process and our values.I think people believe that it's possible for us to grow and to build, but still conserve our incredible natural resources and make sure we're passing on a planet that is livable for the next generation.I think people believe that there's no contradiction between excellence and diversity and that making sure that everybody, regardless of race or gender or sexual orientation, is able to live out their dreams if they're willing to work hard and be responsible, that that's what America is all about. I think most people believe that. But it's those values of hard work and responsibility, everybody getting a fair share--everybody getting a fair shake and everybody doing their fair share and everybody playing by the same set of rules, that's what's at stake in this election.And I'm absolutely confident we're going to win this thing. But the reason I'm confident is because of the people in this room. The reason I'm confident is because of the folks I meet out on the campaign trail. The reason I'm confident is I have extraordinary faith in the American people. And if we're working hard, if we've got as much passion and energy and focus as we did in 2008, we're going to win, because our vision of the country, I think, is more consistent with who we are and our history.But we can't take it for granted. There are going to be a lot of headwinds. The economy is still in tough shape for a lot of people. And I am, as the most visible elected official in the land, rightly held more responsible than anybody else for things I control and for things I don't control. And that means that we're going to have to go out there and actively make the case.So part of my message to all of you is, as wonderful as it is to be in this elegant setting with these elegant people, we're also going to have to hit the streets. And we're also going to have to persuade friends and family and coworkers and knock on doors and make phone calls and raise money.And not all of it is going to be glamorous and not all of it is going to be elegant and not all of it is going to be fun. But things that are worthwhile are always hard. And change is hard, but you should take confidence from the last 3 years that change is possible.And I promise you that one commitment I will make to you tonight is that I will work even harder this year than I did in 2008, and I'm even more passionate about this election. I'm more determined than I was in 2008 that we're going to win in 2012.So thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello! Everybody, please have a seat. Have a seat. Thank you. You're going to make me blush. [Laughter] Well, it is wonderful to be back in New York, and it is wonderful to be with all of you. I understand that you already had a chance to talk with the outstanding junior Senator from New York, and Kirsten is doing a wonderful job, so all of you guys should be very proud. I'm sure that a number of you supported her in previous campaigns and will continue to do so.As I look around the room, I see some old friends--not in years, but--some of you in years--[laughter]--but who have known me for a very long time, people who supported me in my first U.S. Senate race. Andy supported me in my first State senate race.Audience member. Bobby Rush.The President. That's exactly right.I'm going to speak very briefly at the top because I want to spend most of my time in conversation. We're obviously living through a historic time. We just went through the worst financial crisis in our history since the Great Depression--worst financial crisis. We have an Arab Spring that is transforming an entire region of the world. The structure of the global economy, the changes in technology all are happening at a breathless pace.And I think that--when I think back to the last 3 years, I could not be prouder of what we've been able to do in averting a depression, saving an auto industry. We've now seen 22 consecutive months of job growth in the private sector. We're starting to see manufacturing come back to the United States.On the international stage, we've been able to manage the end of one war and the beginning of a transition of another. We have been on the right side of democracy. We've strengthened our alliances, restored respect for the United States around the world.On issues of equity and the values that we care most deeply about, we've made enormous advances: ending ""don't ask, don't tell,"" making sure that equal pay for equal work is--[applause]--appointing two really smart women to the Supreme Court.But we have so much more work to do. We've got so many things that remain to tackle. We have an economy that, although now is getting close to where we were before the financial crisis struck, continues to struggle with these long-term trends that had been going on for decades, where middle class families felt less and less secure, where the education system wasn't equipping our kids to compete in a global economy, where we had an absence of an energy policy, a health care system that was bleeding companies and the Federal Treasury dry and not providing any care for millions of people.And so part of our task is to tell a story about everything that we've gotten done over the last 3 years so that people have confidence that change is possible. It's not easy, it's messy. There are times where it's frustrating, sometimes we experience setbacks, but change occurs, meaningful change that concretely helps people's lives. But even as we tell that story, we've also got to tell a story about where this country needs to go.I've never felt more confident about the capacity of America to meet the moment and assure a solid future for our kids and our grandkids. But it's going to require more work, and it's going to require us making good choices. And this year is going to be as stark a choice as we have seen--a starker choice than we saw in 2008.I mean, think about it. In 2008, I was running against a Republican nominee who agreed that we should ban torture, agreed that we should close Guantanamo, believed in climate change, had worked on immigration reform. And so as profound as the differences were between myself and John McCain, there was some sense of convergence when it came to some very important issues.If you've been listening to the Republican debates, they have moved. [Laughter] I've stayed here. [Laughter] They've gone in a different direction.Now, that's going to make for a hugely important, hugely consequential election, partly because we need to win this election to consolidate all the gains that we've made over the last 3 years and make sure that financial reform is actually implemented effectively and not watered down, and somebody like a Richard Cordray as the head of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is able to prevent people from being subjected to predatory lending, partly because health care reform still has to be implemented.We already have 2.5 million young people who have insurance because of that bill and millions of seniors who are saving money on prescription drugs because of that bill. But there are a whole bunch of folks with preexisting conditions who are still going to need help and a whole bunch of working families who still don't have health insurance, and they're going to need those exchanges that we're setting up put in place so that they can get affordable health care.But it's not just a matter of implementing many of the things we've already done. It's a matter of meeting the requirements to get to where we need to go. We're going to have to solve this fiscal crisis that we're in, in a way that's balanced and fair, and in which everybody does their fair share.We're going to have to make sure that we are investing in community colleges and early childhood education so that everybody genuinely has a fair shot. We're going to have to rebuild America. In a city like New York, we've got tens, hundreds of billions of dollars of infrastructure work where we could put construction workers, right now, who are sitting at home, back to work, making ourselves more productive to meet the challenges of a 21st-century economy.We're going to have to make sure that the budgets for the NIH and NSF and all our basic research in science is maintained so that we continue to be the leading innovators in the world.We're going to have to make sure that all the work we've done over the last 3 years to restore America's standing in the world, that that's preserved, and that people everywhere continue to see America as the one indispensable nation in assuring that there's an international order that thinks about everybody and not just thinks in terms of raw power.So this is a big deal, this race. And I am very confident about our prospects. As tough as the economic environment is, as many headwinds as we're experiencing, I believe we're going to win. But that belief is premised on my confidence in you, that you guys are going to step up, that you are going to show the same kind of resolve and determination and enthusiasm that you showed in 2008.If you do, then I think we'll win the argument, because I think we have a better vision for the future. And I continue to have this profound confidence and faith in the American people and that a vision of a America that gives everybody opportunity and is inclusive and considers our values important to project around the world and in our own Government--I think that's what they want to--that's how they think about America as well.So I hope all you guys are ready to go----Audience member. Fired up.The President. I hope you're fired up. [Laughter] And I don't--I'm glad you guys wrote checks, but I don't just want your money. I'm going to want your ideas and your time and your energy and your effort. And if you give me that, I promise you I will be working harder this time than I did in 2008. All right?Thank you very much, everybody.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody. Please have a seat. It is wonderful to be back in New York, and it is wonderful to be among so many wonderful friends. As I look around the room, I've got people who've supported me when nobody could pronounce my name--[Laughter]--and I was running for the United States Senate. In fact, I've got a couple people here who supported me when I was running for the State senate--my Chicago contingent here. [Laughter]I want to thank all the organizers who helped pull this together. I also want to give a special shout-out to one of the finest mayors that this city has ever had, Ed Koch, who's here. We are grateful to him.We're going to spend most of our time in a conversation. I don't want to give a long speech, partly because I have three more events tonight. [Laughter] But the main reason is I want to save most of the time for a conversation and a dialogue between us.But let me just, first of all, say that we're obviously living in historic times. When I first came into office, we were going through the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, and so understandably, a lot of my time and most of the country's attention was consumed by how do we get America back on its feet.But we were also in the midst of two wars. We were also coming out of a period in which America's leadership around the world had declined. And what we've been able to do, I think, over the last 3 years is to not only avert a Great Depression, not only save an auto industry, not only get the economy moving in the right direction--although we've still got a long way to go--but we were also able to end a war that had distracted us from our most ardent enemies, we were able to decimate Al Qaida, we were able to beef up what we were doing in Afghanistan in a way that now allows us to take a transition and start bringing our troops home there and turn over the security needs of the Afghan people to Afghan security forces.But what we were also able to do, I think, is to restore a sense of America as the sole, indispensable power, a country that, whether it's responding to an earthquake or a tsunami, or it's dealing with a dictator that is about to ruthlessly butcher his people, we aren't out there alone. We're able to mobilize around a set of values and a set of principles and ensure that the international rules of the road are followed.And it's because of that extraordinary work that my Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, has been able to do, that our entire national security team has been able to execute, that America is stronger now than it was 3 years ago. But what's also true is the world is going through the kinds of changes that we haven't seen in a generation. And obviously, nowhere is that more true than in the Middle East.Now, I'm sure we're going to have a chance to take some questions on these issues, but I want to just make a couple of key points.Since I've been in office, we have unequivocally said that Israel's security is non-negotiable, and that we will do everything that's necessary to make sure that Israel is able to thrive and prosper as a secure Jewish state. Part of that has been to make sure that we've got the strongest military cooperation that we've ever had between our two nations. That's not my opinion, by the way, that's the Israeli Government's opinion.Part of it is by making sure that as the Arab Spring swept through the region, that we are pushing hard on countries like Egypt to make sure that they continue to abide by the peace treaties that have served both countries well.Part of it is mobilizing an unprecedented campaign of sanctions and pressure on Iran and stating unequivocally that we're not going to tolerate a nuclear weapon in the hands of this Iranian regime. And we've been able to organize folks like China and Russia that previously would have never gone along with something like this. And it's been so effective that even the Iranians have had to acknowledge that their economy is in a shambles.When I came into office, Iran was united and the world was divided. And now what we have is a united international community that is saying to Iran, you've got to change your ways.Now, this doesn't mean that we're where we need to be. The Arab Spring can still go in a whole multitude of directions, and this is going to be a very delicate time for us to make sure that the legitimate aspirations of ordinary people for democracy and economic opportunity doesn't get channeled by demagogues in ways that are dangerous for America's security interests or Israel's security interests.We still have situations like Syria where people are being slaughtered. And obviously, that has huge ramifications for the region. Iran still has not made the right choice in terms of taking a path that would allow it to rejoin the community of nations and set aside its nuclear ambitions. And obviously, we still have not made the kind of progress that I would have liked to have seen when it comes to peace between Israel and the Palestinians, a peace, by the way, that I believe is not just good for the Palestinians, but is profoundly in the strategic interest of Israel.So we've still got a lot of work to do. And my main message tonight is going to be, I'm going to need you in order for us to finish that work. We're not going to be able to succeed in fully transitioning from a time in which the United States was isolated and at war and disregarded around the world, to one in which we have restored a sense of balance and vision and purpose to world affairs, unless we can continue on the effective path that we're on.And obviously, the American people are still keenly interested in making sure that the economy is working. And that's going to dominate the debate. And although I believe that we've got a great story to tell on that front, although I can tick off statistics about how we've had 22 straight months of private sector job growth and that we're starting to see companies actually bringing jobs back to the United States because of our renewed competitive posture, and I can talk about the investments that we're making in basic research and science to make sure that we maintain our innovative edge, and I can talk about all the things we've done in Government to make it more efficient and leaner so that it can more effectively serve the American people, despite all those stories that we've got to tell, unemployment is still too high and a lot of people are still hurting and the housing market is still weak and State and local governments are still trying to figure out how to balance their books.So, in that environment, this is still going to be a tough race, regardless of who they nominate. And the most important thing that we can do on the foreign policy front is make sure that we've got an America in which everybody has got a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, everybody is playing by the same rules, and we once again create a sense of opportunity and optimism here in the United States. Because when that happens, then America looks outward and it realizes the critical role that it plays in world affairs. And when folks are struggling, we turn inward, and sometimes we don't realize how important it is for us to be involved in some of these critical issues.This is a group obviously that spends a lot of time thinking both about domestic issues and international issues. And my main message to you is I intend to win, but I'm going to need your help doing it.And over the next 10 months, when we are having as clear a contrast between the parties and as profound a debate as we've seen in a very long time about the direction that America needs to take, I hope you know that the values you cherish, what you stand for, what you believe in, are the things I cherish and I believe in and I'm willing to fight for.And if you have that confidence in me--because I certainly have that confidence in you--then I'm absolutely positive that not only will we win the election but, more importantly, we're going to be able to continue this path that we started in 2008.Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody. Please, please have a seat. It is wonderful to see all of you here this afternoon. Some old friends and some new friends.As you know, I'm not here tonight just as President, but also as an adopted member of the Crow Nation. If my adoptive parents were here, I know what they'd say: Kids just grow up so fast. [Laughter]When I made that visit to Montana, I said that my job wasn't just to win an election. It was to make sure that Washington started to focus on you. And I took that commitment seriously.My commitment is deeper than our unique nation-to-nation relationship. It's a commitment to making sure that we get that relationship right. Native Americans have to be full partners in our economy. Your children and your grandchildren have to have an equal shot at the American Dream.And that's why for 3 years in a row now, we've brought tribal leaders to Washington to develop an agenda that reflects your hopes and your aspirations and the needs of your tribes. I've appointed Native Americans to senior positions in my administration and in my White House. And many of you have had a chance to work with Kim Teehee, who does an extraordinary job coordinating our Native American affairs in the White House. And we've worked together to tackle some of the most difficult challenges facing Native American families.And we should be proud of what we've done so far, but it should also sharpen our resolve to do even more. As long as Native Americans face unemployment rates that are far higher than the national average, we've got more work to do. And I wake up every day focused on how do we restore America's promise for all our people, including our first Americans.So, in my State of the Union Address this week, I laid out my blueprint for an economy that's built to last, an economy built on American manufacturing and American energy, skills for American workers, and a return to American values of fair play and responsibility. And that's what we're fighting for.And I want you guys to be full partners in that fight because I believe that one day we're going to be able to look back on these years and say that this was a turning point in nation-to-nation relations; that this was a turning point when the nations all across the country recognized that they were full partners, treated with dignity and respect and consultation; that this wasn't just a side note on a White House agenda, but this was part and parcel of our broader agenda to make sure that everybody has opportunity.And it's also a moment when we build a strong middle class in Indian Country. It's not simply a ward, but is able to marshal the resources to create its own agenda and its own destiny and its own economic development and its own businesses. That's what we're looking for.We want new businesses and new opportunities to take root on the reservation. We want to stop repeating the mistakes of the past and begin building a better future, one that honors old traditions and also welcomes every single Native American into the American Dream.We've done some great work together. Whether it's making sure that Indian Health was permanently extended and that we were putting additional resources to make sure that we're picking up the health of Native Americans all across the country, whether it's an Executive order that specifies our focus on education with all of your tribes, whether it's making sure that we are working hard to allow the expansion of land in trust on behalf of nations to go further, we've made some significant progress. But we've got a lot more to do.And I'm going to need all of you to continue to consult with us, to continue to work with us, continue to partner with us. I guarantee you that the work we've done over these first 3 years is not the end, it's just the beginning.And if you stick with me, I promise you guys I'm going to be sticking with you. All right, God bless you. Thank you. Thank you.[At this point, the President answered questions from members of the audience, and no transcript was provided.]",2008,obama
"The President. First of all, I just want to thank Stewart and Sandra for setting up this extraordinary event. It is true that this is now the third time I've been here. It's been said by a friend of mine, Abner Mikva, former Member of Congress, that being friends with a politician is like perpetually having a student in college. [Laughter] But this is the last campaign. I'm about to graduate. [Laughter] So those tuition checks will slowly diminish.There was also suggestion that we might sing a duet together. And I have to tell you, though, you try to limit these appearances so that you leave them hungry for more. [Laughter] So we may not hear me singing for quite some time. I'm going to be very brief on the front end because I want to spend most of my time in a conversation with you guys and make sure that we have time for questions.There he is. [Laughter] She stole your thunder, man.Audience member. I decided to show up. [Laughter]The President. But look, we've gone through 3 of the toughest years that we've seen in our lifetimes. And a lot of folks are still hurting out there. But as I said at the State of the Union last week, we're beginning to see progress. We averted a great depression. The auto industry has come back, and GM is number one again. I just went to the auto show today to see some of the terrific cars that Detroit is churning out.We've had 3 million jobs created over the last 22 months, and we had the highest job growth last year since 2005, the highest manufacturing job growth since the 1990s. There is a sense that although there's still a lot of uncertainties out there--Europe, the price of oil--that America is slowly repairing from this extraordinary economic and financial crisis.And during the last 3 years, even as we singularly focused on making sure that we were able to right the ship, we were also able to accomplish a lot of goals that we had set for ourselves in 2008, whether it was passing health care reform so that already 2.5 million young people have insurance that wouldn't have it otherwise and senior citizens are seeing discounts on their prescription drugs, and we're now setting up exchanges all across the country so that never again would somebody with a preexisting condition finds themselves barred from being able to get health insurance.We were able to end ""don't ask, don't tell"" so that it doesn't matter who you love, you can serve the country that you love. We were able to take billions of dollars that were going to banks as middlemen for students' loans, and now it's being channeled directly to students so that millions of young people across the country find college a little bit more affordable.We have made progress on a whole variety of fronts domestically. And obviously, internationally we kept one of the first promises I made as President of the United States, and that was to end the war in Iraq in a responsible way. And we're now in the process of transitioning in Afghanistan.But having said all that, we have so much more work to do, because what compelled me to run in the first place back in 2008 was a larger challenge. It had to do with what had happened to the American promise, the idea if you work hard, then you can find a job that supports a family and you can send your kids to college and you can retire with dignity and respect. That basic compact that said no matter who you are, no matter where you came from, you could make it if you try, that had been slipping away from too many people for too long.And that was a set of challenges that were decades in the making. We never expected to solve those overnight, but what we understand is that the defining issue of our time is how we restore the basic promise of the American Dream.And last week at the State of the Union, I laid out a blueprint for how we get there that involves rebuilding American manufacturing and replicating the success we've had in the auto industry across the board. It means revitalizing how we train our young people for the jobs of the 21st century, creating skills for American workers, not just through 4-year colleges, but also through 2-year colleges.It means having an American energy policy that doesn't just look to the past, but also looks to the future: clean energy, solar, wind, biodiesel, and electric cars.And it means the restoration of American values where we're certain that everybody is playing by the same set of rules, whether it comes to Wall Street and how they treat their customers, whether it comes to dealing with polluters and making sure that we still have clean air and clean water, but also when it comes to our Tax Code and ensuring that those investments we have to make in basic research and science and infrastructure--all the things that help make us an economic superpower--that we're able to pay for those without adding to the deficit. And that means that we have a tax system that's more equitable and we're stripping out the loopholes and the special deals that have been carved out for so long.That's our challenge. That's what we're fighting for. And the other side has a fundamentally different idea about how to move this country forward. It's a vision that got us into this mess in the first place, and we can't go back to it. And frankly, the American people are not buying this notion that what will cure our ills is more tax cuts for the wealthiest of Americans and a rolling back of regulations designed to protect American consumers and our children from pollution. People don't believe that that somehow is a recipe for success over the long term.The challenge we have is people have gone through 3 years of really tough times. And so they don't experience the economy in some abstract way; they're experiencing it in terms of not being able to find a job or their house being underwater or their kids having to come back even after they've gotten a college education and tens of thousands of dollars in debt and still not being able to find a job. And given the difficulties that a lot of folks are still going through, it's not surprising that they're feeling doubtful. Even if we're moving in the right direction, their sense is, gosh, we sure hope--we sure wish that it went faster.So this is going to be a tough race because of that economic reality, not because of the ideas of the other side. And our job over the next year is to make sure that, number one, we make the case about what we've done, because we have an extraordinary record, a story to tell that resonates with the American people when they have the facts; and number two, to lift up the prospects, the possibility, of an America where once again people who are responsible and are doing the right thing are able to get ahead.And I think we can accomplish those things, but I'm going to need your help. This is not going to be easy. This is going to be tough. And since 2008, as I often say, my hair is now grayer, and I've got a few more dings. [Laughter] Sometimes, I look at pictures of the campaign and I say, gosh, I was really young. [Laughter]But you know, my determination, my passion for making sure that everybody has a chance in this country, the same sense of determination that I had in 2008, it's stronger now than it was then. I am absolutely convinced that we're on the right track and we just got to fight for it.I'm going to need you to help, but if you do, then we're going to have 5 more years to be able to get everything done that needs to get done so that this country reflects the values that we all care so deeply about.Thanks.",2008,obama
"Thank you so much, Rob, for the introduction. And it's wonderful to see all of you. I'm going to be very brief at the top because I want to spend most of this time in a dialogue.As Rob said, I see a lot of friends here, people who supported me since way back when, before people could say my name. And as I look around the room, folks from all across the country, I am mindful of the fact that not only have you done so much to help me be in a position where I can make a difference in America, but separate and apart from my election, so many of you have supported good causes that are making a difference day in and day out. And so I just want to say thank you for that.As Rob said, the last 3 years, we've obviously gone through historic times, a set of historic challenges: the worst economic crisis and financial crisis since the Great Depression, two wars, a transformation of our geopolitics. And I couldn't be prouder of the track record that we've been able to put together over the last 3 years, not only in preventing us from sliding into a Great Depression, not only shifting from a situation where we were losing 800,000 jobs per month to 22 consecutive months of job growth, the highest manufacturing job growth since the nineties, the largest job growth, period, last year since 2005, passing historic health care legislation that we're in the process now of implementing, tough Wall Street reform legislation that is going to make sure that we don't see the same kind of reckless behavior that got us into this mess in the first place, along with a set of laws that are going to make sure that the values we care so deeply about are the law of the land, things like ending ""don't ask, don't tell"" or making sure that people are actually getting equal pay for equal work, one of the strongest environmental records of any President in the modern era.So, across the board, I couldn't be prouder of what we've accomplished. On the other hand, what I'm also mindful of is how much remains to be done.What led me to run in 2008 was a sense that there had been a fundamental shift in the social compact, a fundamental shift in the American promise, the notion that if you worked hard, if you met your responsibilities, that you could get ahead, support a family, send your kid to college, avoid being bankrupted by an illness, retire with dignity and respect. That basic bargain felt like it was slipping away from far too many Americans.And so in addition to dealing with crises, our goal since before I came into office was how do we restore that sense that any American, no matter where they're from, no matter what they look like, that they've got a shot to succeed; how do we restore an America where everybody gets a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, and we're all playing by the same set of rules.This past Tuesday, I tried to lay out that vision, that blueprint for how we move forward, involving resuscitating American manufacturing--the same way we've done with the auto industry, we can do that across the board. American energy--how do we, yes, make sure that American oil production and natural gas are properly produced, but how do we also make sure that we're still investing in clean energy and looking 10, 20, 30 years down the road and making sure that we're at the forefront of the kind of clean energy economy that I think everybody is going to have to adjust to?How do we make sure that we've got a tax system that reflects everybody doing their fair share? Because if we're going to bring down our deficits and make investments in our infrastructure and our basic research, then we're going to have to do it in a balanced way?And how do we make sure that we've got a set of regulations in place that aren't designed to squelch entrepreneurial activity and the free market, but are designed to make sure that our consumers are protected and that our air is clean and our water is clean and that we don't see another crisis like we saw in the housing market.And those are going to be huge fights. And that's why I think this year is going to be extraordinarily exciting. In some way, the spirit of this year's race will be different because in 2008, obviously everybody was full of hope and possibility, and we had not yet gone through a crisis. And it's worn on people, and it's been tough for folks. Now I think what we're really struggling for is the kind of America that most of the people here believe in and I believe that most Americans believe in.But we're going to have to fight for it, because the other party has a fundamentally different vision about where to take this country. Their basic argument is, is that if we strip out regulations, if we disregard environmental concerns, if we take away protections for consumers, if we lower taxes even further for the kind of folks who are in this room, that somehow growth and the American Dream will be restored. And I fundamentally disagree with that vision. I think it's the wrong vision for America.But given the difficulties that Americans have gone through over the last 3 years, this is going to be a tough fight, and we're all going to have to be focused on making sure that every single day the American people understand not only where we want to take the country, but also that we're willing to fight for them; that this is not an abstract ideological argument, but this is a practical, concrete argument about whether or not they're going to be able to find a good job that pays a living wage, whether they're going to have health care that protects their families, whether or not, as consumers, they're going to be protected from being taken advantage of. They've got to feel that we are actively advocating on their behalf.The last point I'd make is, is that--and I made this point at the State of the Union--as I travel around the world, and obviously, we've been extraordinarily active, not only ending the war in Iraq, but managing a responsible transition in Afghanistan, helping to usher in an Arab Spring that is still uncertain in terms of its outcome, what's striking to me is the degree to which for all of the challenges we've gone through over the last 3 years, the world still looks to us for leadership. They're still looking to America because for all our power, they also understand we are invested in a set of international rules and international norms and a set of universal values that, historically, superpowers have not paid a lot of attention to.And so when we went to Asia, for example, what was striking was, yes, people understand that China is on the rise and economically their fates are going to be tied not only to us, but also to a rapidly growing China, but when it comes to putting together an architecture out there that assures that small countries are protected, that everybody is abiding by the same sets of rules, that their natural resources are properly developed and not exploited, they're still looking to us.And so part of the message I wanted to send last week at the State of the Union was, we've been through tougher times before, we've been through bigger challenges before, and we've always come out stronger, more united, and have remained a beacon of hope around the world because--I think it was Churchill who said that the Americans always end up doing the right thing after they've tried every other alternative. [Laughter] And that's true. We muddle our way through because of messy democracy, and it's in our nature to be contentious and have these big arguments, but ultimately, we choose the right path. And that's what the world is counting on right now as well.I think we're going to get there, but--in fact, I know we're going to get there--but I'm going to need all of your help to get there as well.So thanks for the support in the past, and I'm looking forward to you guys being in the foxhole with me this year. Thank you very much.",2008,obama
"Thank you. Thank you, Laura, for the wonderful introduction, the best introduction that a Cubs fan has ever given me. [Laughter] The rivalry is fierce in Chicago, but I'll make an exception here.And I want to thank Karen and Nan for opening up their incredible home. To all of you, and to everybody who helped put this together, thank you so much. I am very grateful.I'm going to be very brief at the top, because I want to--usually, in these things, I like to spend most of my time in a conversation. I do want to acknowledge that I have as good a Cabinet as I think any President in modern history has had. And one of the stars of that Cabinet is sitting right here, Kathleen Sebelius.All of America has gone through an incredibly difficult, wrenching time these last 3 years. And it doesn't matter whether you are Black or White, whether you are northern or southern, rich or poor, gay or straight; I think all of us have been deeply concerned over these last 3 years to making sure that our economy recovers, that we're putting people back to work, that we stabilize the financial system. The amount of hardship and challenge that ordinary families have gone through over the last 3 years has been incredible. And there are still a lot of folks hurting out there.The good news is that we're moving in the right direction. And when I came into office, we were losing 750,000 jobs a month, and this past month we gained 250,000. That's a million-job swing. And for the last 23 months, we've now created 3.7 million jobs. And that's more than any time since 2000--or, yes, since 2005--the number of jobs that we created last year, and more manufacturing jobs than any time since the 1990s.So we're making progress on that front now, but we've still got a long way to go. Today we announced a housing settlement, brought about by our Attorney General and States attorneys all across the country. And as a consequence, we're going to see billions of dollars in loan modifications and help to folks who are seeing their homes underwater. And that's going to have a huge impact.In my State of the Union, we talked about the need for American manufacturing--companies coming back, insourcing, and recognizing how incredibly productive American workers are--and our need to continue to double down on investments in clean energy and making sure that our kids are getting trained so that they are competing with any workers in the world and are also effectively equipped to be great citizens and to understand the world around them.And we talked about the fact that we've got to have the same set of values of fair play and responsibility for everybody, whether it's Wall Street or Main Street. It means that we have a Consumer Finance Protection Board that is enforcing rules that make sure that nobody is getting abused by predatory lending or credit card scams. It means that we have regulations in place that protect our air and our water.And it also means that we ensure that everybody in our society has a fair shot, is treated fairly. That's at the heart of the American Dream. For all the other stuff going on, one thing every American understands is you should be treated fairly, you should be judged on the merits. If you work hard, if you do a good job, if you're responsible in your community, if you're looking after you family, if you're caring for other people, then that's how you should be judged. Not by what you look like, not by how you worship, not by where you come from, not by who you love.And so the work that we've done with respect to the LGBT community I think is just profoundly American and is at the heart of who we are. And that's why I could not be prouder of the track record that we've done, starting with the very beginning when we started to change, through Executive order, some of the Federal policies. Kathleen--the work that she did making sure that hospital visitation was applied equally to same-sex couples, just like with anybody else's loved ones. The changes we made at the State Department. The changes we made in terms of our own personnel policies, but also some very high-profile work like ""don't ask, don't tell.""And what's been striking over the course of these last 3 years is, because we've rooted this work in this concept of fairness, and we haven't gone out of our way to grab credit for it, we haven't gone out of our way to call other folks names if they didn't always agree with us on stuff, but we just kept plodding along, because of that, in some ways what's been remarkable is how readily the public recognizes this is the right thing to do.Think about--just take ""don't ask, don't tell"" as an example. The perception was somehow that this would be this huge, ugly issue. But because we did it methodically, because we brought the Pentagon in, because we got some very heroic support from people like Bob Gates and Mike Mullen, and they thought through institutionally how to do it effectively--since it happened, nothing's happened. [Laughter] Nothing's happened.We still have the best military by far on Earth. There hasn't been any notion of erosion and unit cohesion. It turns out that people just want to know, are you a good soldier, are you a good sailor, are you a good airman, are you a good marine, good coastguardsman? That's what they're concerned about. Do you do your job? Do you do your job well?It was striking--when I was in Hawaii, there is a Marine base close to where we stay. Probably the nicest piece of real estate I think the Marines have. [Laughter] It is very nice. And they have this great gym, and you go in there, you work out, and you always feel really inadequate because they're really in good shape, all these people. [Laughter] They're lifting 100-pound dumbbells and all this stuff. At least three times that I was at that gym, people came up, very quietly, to say, you know what, thank you for ending ""don't ask, don't tell.""Now, here's the thing. I didn't even know whether they were gay or lesbian. I didn't ask, because that wasn't the point. The point was these were outstanding marines who appreciated the fact that everybody was going to be treated fairly.We're going to have more work to do on this issue, as is true on a lot of other issues. There's still areas where fairness is not the rule. And we're going to have to keep on pushing in the same way: persistently, politely, listening to folks who don't always agree with us, but sticking to our guns in terms of what our values are all about. What American values are all about.And that's going to be true on the issues that are of importance to the LGBT community specifically, but it's also going to be true on a host of other issues where we're just going to have to make persistent steady progress. Whether it is having an energy policy that works for America, whether it is having an immigration policy that is rational so that we are actually both a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants, whether it's making sure that as we get our fiscal house in order we do it in a balanced way where everybody is doing their fair share to help close this deficit. It's not just being done on the backs of people who don't have enough political clout on Capitol Hill, but it's broadly applied and everybody is doing their fair share.On all these issues, my view is that if we go back to first principles and we ask ourselves, what does it mean for us as Americans to live in a society where everybody has a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, we're playing by a fair set of rules, everybody is engaging in fair play, then we're going to keep on making progress.And that's where I think the American people are at. It doesn't mean this is going to be smooth. It doesn't mean that there aren't going to be bumps in the road. It's not always good politics; sometimes, it's not. But over the long term, the trajectory of who we are as a nation, I believe that's our national character. We trend towards fairness and treating people well. And as long as we keep that in mind, I think we should be optimistic not just about the next election, but about the future of this country.Thank you.",2008,obama
"Hello, everybody. It is great to see you. Obviously, I want to, first of all, thank the Bell family, Colleen and Brad, for opening up this spectacular venue and for being such incredible friends. And thanks your kids, too, for putting up with all of us. [Laughter]I want to just make--in addition to the host committee, I want to make two other acknowledgements. First of all, your outstanding mayor, Antonio Villaraigosa, is in the house. And the mayor who is going to be responsible for making sure that we have a great convention in Charlotte, North Carolina, Anthony Foxx is here as well.So I'm going to be very brief at the top because I want to spend most of this time in conversation and answering your questions, getting your comments and advice.We've gone through 3 pretty tough years in this country. And as I was just telling the crowd outside, I think when I think back to 2008, nobody here got involved in that campaign because you thought it was going to be easy. The odds were not in favor of Barack Hussein Obama ending up as President of the United States. [Laughter] The reason you got involved was because we shared a vision of what this country should be.We believed in a country where everybody gets a fair shot. It doesn't matter who you are, what you look like, where you come from, if you're willing to put in the sweat and hard work, you're able to achieve. And we believed in a country where everybody does their fair share. It's not just some people who are required to be good citizens, not just some who are required to the common good, but everybody has to pull their weight. Whether it comes to service, whether it comes to taxes, whether it comes to participation, whether it comes to caring for those who are vulnerable, all of us are called.The third idea was a country in which everybody follows the same set of rules, a country based on fair play. We don't have one set of rules for Wall Street and a different set of rules for Main Street. We don't have one set of rules for kids who are born into wealthy neighborhoods and another set of rules for kids that are born into poor neighborhoods, that we expect everybody is showing responsibility and everybody is acting in accordance with some of our deepest held values.And that's what the campaign was about. There were issues, specific things we wanted to accomplish. We wanted to end the war in Iraq; we ended the war in Iraq. We wanted to reinstate rule of law as we're fighting terrorism and stop torture, and we did that. We wanted to make sure that we reversed this economic chaos coming out of the recession where we were losing 750,000 jobs a month, and we're now gaining 250,000 jobs a month and have created 3.7 million jobs over the last 23 months.We said that in this country nobody should go bankrupt because they get sick. This country is too wealthy for us to allow something like that to happen. And despite all the frustrations and barriers and setbacks that we experienced, we got it done. And right now 2.5 million kids have insurance right now that didn't have it before--2.5 million.I get letters from young people who say, you know what, I got diagnosed with a treatable cancer--wouldn't have had a chance if it hadn't been for the fact that this health care bill passed, and I was on my parent's health care plan, and I was able to go in and get a checkup. That's happening right now.We said that it shouldn't matter who you love if you want to serve the country you love. And we ended ""don't ask, don't tell."" And I was telling the folks outside about the fact that when I was out in Kaneohe Marine Base, working out with marines--which is a bad idea because they're in better shape than you are--[laughter]--on three separate occasions, the marines came up and said, thank you for ending ""don't ask, don't tell."" And you know what, I didn't even ask them, did it apply to you, because it didn't matter. The point was they understood that the integrity of our Armed Forces would be enhanced, not debilitated, when we got rid of that law.And so there were a bunch of specific objectives and specific issues that we wanted: making sure that the kids got health care; making sure that we expanded student loans for young people so that the circumstances they were born into wouldn't be a barrier to their ability to achieve; being able to project an America around the world that is based not just on our might, but also on our values.There were specific things that we did in each of those categories. But the bigger mission in 2008 was everybody getting a fair shot, everybody doing their fair share, everybody playing by the same set of rules. And that's still what this election is about. It's still what this battle is about in this country.The other side has a very different vision about where they want to take this country. And they've got fervor and sincerity, a vision that says, you know what, it's okay if just a few people do very well and those who are left behind, it's probably their fault. And if we just go back to a philosophy that says we slash taxes for those of us who've been most fortunate--the folks in this room--that somehow that's going to be good for everybody else. If we get rid of regulations that keep our air clean and our water clean, that somehow business will be unleashed. That if we roll back reforms that were designed to make sure that the kind of recklessness that got us in this mess in the first place, that those same institutions have a free hand, that somehow we're going to better off.That's their working theory. And it's wrong. And it's not who we are.And so we've got to fight for what we believe in as much now as we fought for it in 2012. And it's not going to be easy because there are a lot of folks out there who are still hurting. And there are a lot of people out there who, understandably, after just slogging for 3 years and after maybe in some cases slogging for a decade or two decades and seeing their standard of living deteriorating and seeing their home underwater and seeing their families struggling and folks losing jobs. It's understandable that some of them may feel discouraged and feel cynical, and say, you know what, nothing changes.But part of our job is to say, as tough as it is, as incremental as it sometimes seems, things have changed. And they can change more if we fight for it, if we're determined, if we have confidence in each other, if we decide to unite instead of divide.And I think the American people, beneath all the pain and hurt and frustration that they feel, they still want to believe that that change is possible and there's still that hope there. They're optimistic, fundamentally, about this country. They love it so deeply.And our job over the next year is to make sure that they can channel that fundamental optimism and decency and courage and come together to create the kind of country that we want for our kids and our grandkids.I mentioned outside I am much grayer now than I was when I started this thing. [Laughter] And Mario Cuomo once said that campaigning is poetry and governance is prose. And we've been slogging through prose for the last 3 years and sometimes that gets people discouraged. Because people, they like the poetry. That's what's inspiring. The prose is frustrating because it involves compromises and it involves half-loaves and it involves getting some progress, but not as much as you want. And so people get frustrated.And I guarantee you, there are all kinds of friends of yours who, when you talk to them: ""Well, Guantanamo is not closed yet, or the war in Afghanistan is still raging. Or why isn't it that the housing crisis hasn't been completely fixed and climate change is still going on?"" And I understand that. I feel the same way sometimes.Every morning I wake up and I say, are we doing everything we can to get everything that needs to be done done right now? But one of the things that's happened over the last 3 years is a recognition that nothing beats persistence. Inspiration is wonderful, nice speeches are wonderful, pretty posters--that's great. [Laughter] But what's required at the end of the day to create the kind of country we want is stick-to-it-ness. It's determination. It's saying we don't quit.And we'll be tacking and zigging and zagging, and sometimes it will feel like there's no wind behind us and we're just sitting there and it's frustrating. But that north star is still out there. And if you are determined, then you'll get there.And this country has always gotten there. We have always been able to tack towards that north star. And we're not going to stop now. That's what this election is about. That's why you're here. And I couldn't be more excited about the prospect.All right. Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you. Thank you.",2008,obama
"Hello, L.A.! Oh, it is good to be in L.A., although you guys are not used to this kind of weather, are you? You're all cold. This is balmy, people. I'm trying to let you know. [Laughter]A few folks I just want to acknowledge. First of all, to Colleen and Brad and the entire Bell family, thank you for making this incredible night possible. We're so grateful to them. What about the Foo Fighters? Love the Foo Fighters. They were tired of winning so many awards, so they said, let's do something else tonight. [Laughter] We are so grateful to them. Jack Black, one of my favorites; Rashida Jones--we love Rashida; the mayor of Los Angeles, Antonio Villaraigosa, who was announced tonight as the permanent chair of the 2012 Democratic National Convention. And our host and cochair in Charlotte, North Carolina, Mayor Anthony Foxx of Charlotte is here. So we are grateful to him.Now, some of you are back for a return engagement because you were around in 2008. A few of you guys in the front row, you were only 1 year old so you may not remember this. [Laughter] But sometimes I have occasion to think back to the 2008 campaign, and I think about that magical night in Grant Park--when it was actually 60 degrees in November, which does not happen in Chicago very often--and I remind people of what I said that night. I said change is never easy. Change doesn't happen overnight. Change is hard, especially when you're dealing with challenges that have been building up over decades. But if everyone maintains their determination, their sense of purpose, the bonds that we have with each other as Americans, then there's no challenge we can't overcome.Now it's hard to remember that, because those were such heady days, those last few days of the campaign. Some of you had gotten involved in the campaign very early, before anybody could pronounce my name. [Laughter] Right here. And obviously, you didn't do it because it was a sure thing because, let's face it, the odds of Barack Obama--Barack Hussein Obama--becoming President were not high. [Laughter]The reason you got involved, and the reason you were a constant source of inspiration to me, was because you recognized that the America that you grew up in, your idea of America wasn't matching up to what was happening all across the country; that the idea that if you work hard, if you are responsible, if you're looking after your family, if you're doing your very best, that somehow you can live out that American Dream and get ahead and support your family and have health care that protects your family if something goes wrong and you're able to retire with dignity and respect and watch your kids exceed your greatest dreams by going to college and doing great things; that too many folks felt that that dream had been betrayed. And this was before this extraordinary financial crisis that we ended up having in 2007 and 2008.People were already feeling that there was a mismatch between our idea of what America should be and what was happening around the country. That's what you were fighting for. That's what this campaign was about. It was not about me. It was about you and the commitments you make to each other, to your families and your children, your grandchildren, your neighbors and your coworkers and your friends and your fellow citizens.And because of the incredible work that you did, we began to transform the country. We knew it was going to be a long journey. We didn't know maybe how steep it was going to be. We didn't realize in 2008 the nature of the crisis, how profound it was going to be. Four million jobs lost before I even took office; 4 million jobs lost in the 6 months after I took office before any of our economic policies had a chance to take effect. The worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, all across the country, people struggling to find a job, seeing their home values deteriorate. We did not fully comprehend at that point how deep this crisis would be.But because of you, because of your commitment, because of your determination and your vision, we began to see change happening all across the country. And when you think about change that we can believe in, as hard as these last 3 years have been, don't underestimate the changes we've made.The month I took office, we were losing 750,000 jobs every month; last month we created 250,000 jobs. We've now created 3.7 million jobs all across the country over the last 23 months. We've seen more manufacturing jobs created than any time since the 1990s. An auto industry is saved, and GM is the number-one automaker in the world again.So, slowly, steadily, as difficult as it's been, we've started to see the economy rebound and recover. We've started to see people who were starting to lose hope see once again the possibilities in their lives.But that's not all that we did. You know, I was talking to a young person who told me that they had been diagnosed with cancer--they had written me a letter, actually. And fortunately, the diagnosis was one where the prospects are good. But she told me that she wouldn't even have gone to a doctor had it not been for the fact that we passed something that had eluded Presidents for a century, the idea that everybody in America deserves health care. Nobody should be left out. And because of those changes, already 2.6 million young people have health care that they wouldn't otherwise have. And because she had health care, including preventive care, she was able to get a checkup and this cancer was diagnosed early and her prospects are good.And she said, ""This wouldn't have happened had it not been for what you did."" And what I have to tell you today is that's something you did. There are people whose lives have been saved because of the work that you did in 2008.I was at a Marine base in Hawaii--my hometown. And we were working out. And you don't want to really work out with marines because they're all in really good shape and they make you feel bad about yourself. [Laughter] But during the course of the 10 days that I was there, at least three times a marine would come up and say: ""Mr. President, thank you for passing laws rescinding 'don't ask, don't tell,' because I am proud to serve my country, and I didn't think it was ever going to happen. And to see that happen makes all the difference in my life.""And you know what I told them? I said, don't thank me, thank all the people who worked in 2008 to make this campaign a reality. That's what you did, because of your commitment. The first bill I signed into law, the Lilly Ledbetter Act, that says a very simple principle: There's got to be equal pay for equal work, and I don't want my daughters being treated [differently]* than anybody else's sons when it comes to how they're treated on the job. That happened because of you. That's what change means.Making sure that young people all across America have a little bit of a better shot going to college. We took $60 billion that was going to banks, subsidizing banks through the student loan program, and we said let's give that money directly to students. And there are millions more students now who are able to go to college and accrue less debt because of you, because of what you did.And then I was down in North Carolina and talking to some troops, the last troops to come home from Iraq, a war that I said we would end, and it is now over. And seeing them greet their families and hug their loved ones, I thought back to the campaign and all the volunteers who had knocked on doors and made phone calls. That was what you did. That's what you did.So the point is, is that as tough as things are, the changes we've made are remarkable, and they're making a difference in the lives of people every single day. And that should be a source of satisfaction, but it can't be a source of complacency, because we're not done. We've got so much more work to do.All the challenges that existed before the crisis are still there. We've still got a middle class that's struggling. We still have a make-or-break moment for folks who are in the middle class or trying to get in the middle class, who want to live out that American Dream.And that's why at the most recent State of the Union I laid out a vision for where we need to go, and it means that we're once again making things in America, not just buying things in America, but we are building cars and creating new products and new services, and we're selling them all over the world.It means American manufacturing resurging. It means American sources of energy--and not just the old energy, but the new energy--solar energy and wind energy and biodiesel that can not only free ourselves from dependence on foreign oil, but also help save a planet.We've got more work to do making sure that every single one of our young people have the skills that they need to compete in the 21st century. We still have schools where half the kids are dropping out. And despite the amazing changes that we've been able to make and the reforms we've been able to push, we got to follow through, we've got to finish up.And we've got to make sure that health care gets implemented, because there are folks who want to roll it back. And we've got to make sure that the Wall Street reform process that we put into place to make sure that never again do we have those kinds of bailouts and the kind of recklessness that almost brought this economy to its knees, we've got to make sure that those who are trying to roll it back do not succeed at rolling it back.We've got more work to do so that America once again is a place where everybody has a fair shot, everybody does their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same set of rules. That's our vision.And the other side has a fundamentally different vision of America. Their view is that everybody is on their own. If you don't have health care, tough luck, you're on your own. If you were born into poverty, pull yourself up by your bootstraps, you're on your own. They've got a different vision that basically says, let's go back to the old policies where a few do really well and everybody else struggles just to get by. And they're explicit about it. This is not me putting spin on the ball. [Laughter] They've been very clear about what their agenda is.And so we're going to have to push back. We're going to have to preserve the changes we've made, and we've got to keep on driving. We've got to make sure that our schools are number one. We've got to make sure that college is affordable. We've got to make sure health care is implemented. We've got to have immigration reform, because we are a nation of laws and we are a nation of immigrants.On the foreign policy front, we've got to make sure that now that we've ended the war in Iraq responsibly, we've got to make sure that we're transitioning in Afghanistan responsibly and start bringing our troops home there.One of the proudest things of my 3 years in office is helping to restore a sense of respect for America around the world, a belief that we are not just defined by the size of our military, despite the incredible feats of our military and the incredible sacrifices of our men and women in uniform, but we're also defined by our values and our respect for rule of law and our willingness to help countries in need. We've got to preserve that, and we've got to build on that.So we've got enormous work to do. And the main message I've got for you tonight is it's not going to be easier this time, it's going to be harder this time. We're not going to have to just have as much energy as we did last time, we've got to have more energy than we did last time. It's not going to be enough for us to just sit back and say, look at all the great things we've done, because people out there are hurting and they need us to do more.So I'm going to need you. You are going to have to carry this thing the same way that you did in 2008. And part of what's going to make it more difficult--I'll be honest with you--is look, I'm older now. I'm gray. [Laughter] I've been a little dinged up. It's not quite as cool to be on the Obama bandwagon. Back in 2008, it was the new thing. [Laughter] Everybody had their poster, and you'd be talking to your coworkers: ""Oh, have you heard about Obama? Yes! Oh, no, you haven't? Let me tell you about him."" [Laughter] Now, everybody can pronounce my name. They don't always say it nicely, but--[laughter].But that determination, the values that got us this far, are undiminished. I believe even more in the possibility of change now than I did when I first got into office, not only because we've made those changes, but also because as President, I have a chance to travel all across the country and meet people of every walk of life: Black, White, Latino, Asian, gay, straight, rich, poor, north, south, east, west. And what's remarkable to me is, as hard as these last 3 years have been, that core decency, that sense that we can overcome whatever challenges are ahead of us, that we are still a nation full of possibility, that we still have the best workers on Earth, and we have the best universities on Earth, and we've got the best entrepreneurs on Earth and we've got a democracy that, as flawed and as frustrating as it can be sometimes, still gives everybody a chance to make their voices heard, and we work things out. As bitter and tough as they seem sometimes, we work it out, and we end up on the other side stronger and more unified than we were before. That's what gives me confidence. That's what inspires me. You inspire me.And so if you are ready for one more round, if you are ready for one more fight, if, despite all the naysayers and all the cynicism and all the tough times we've been through, you're staying--still saying to yourself, ""Yes, we can,"" you're still saying to yourself, ""There's change out there I can believe in,"" and if you're willing not just to talk the talk, but walk the walk and knock on doors and make phone calls and send out e-mails and tweet and do whatever it is that you do to mobilize your neighborhoods and your friends and your coworkers and your family. And if we get folks out to vote, I promise you there is nothing that can stop the United States of America. And we will remind them just why it is that this is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"Thank you, Orange County! Thank you. Thank you. Everybody, please have a seat. It is great to be here on such a spectacular day. This is what California weather is supposed to look like. I have to say, yesterday, up in L.A., I could see my breath when I was speaking. [Laughter] I was a little concerned. But today you guys are living up to your billing.I want to thank everybody who's here, but obviously I want to, first of all, thank Janet for the wonderful introduction, but also being such a powerhouse in terms of helping making this thing happen. Janet Keller, thank you. As well as Bernie--thank you so much for letting Janet spend all this time on this. [Laughter]I want to thank Jeff and Nancy and their entire family for opening up their spectacular home to us. Thank you so much. Thanks for your hospitality. To Wylie and Bette and so many other who've helped to pull this together, you guys have been with me through thick and thin, so thank you so much. We love you guys.And a couple of wonderful elected officials--one, your own Representative, Loretta Sanchez, is in the house. But we also have an import here. He is going to be hosting us at the Democratic National Convention. He's the mayor of Charlotte. Anthony Foxx is here--Charlotte, North Carolina.Now, usually in these things what I like to do is be brief at the top and then I have some time to answer questions and take comments and suggestions, and so it ends up being a little more informal.But picking up on something that Janet said, we've obviously gone through 3 of the toughest years that America has seen in our lifetime: the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression; the worst financial crisis since the 1930s; 4 million people losing their jobs in the 6 months before I took office, 4 million more in the 6 months after I was sworn in, but before our economic policies had a chance to take effect; an auto industry on the brink of collapse; layoffs all across the country; State and local governments struggling; at the same as we faced enormous global challenges from two wars to a global economy that was shrinking.And as we look back over these last 3 years, I think we can all say that we're not yet where we need to be, we haven't solved every challenge, but what we've been able to accomplish--in part because of you, in part because of your support and your voices--has been remarkable. The month I took office we were losing 750,000 a month. Last month we created 250,000. That's a million-job swing. And that's representative of the progress that the economy has made. We now have more manufacturing jobs being created than any time since the 1990s. And although unemployment is still too high, over the last 23 months we've created 3.7 million jobs and people are starting to get a sense that the economy is on the rebound.Even as that has been our singular focus, we recognize that there are a whole bunch of issues and a whole bunch of challenges that faced us even before this recession hit. That's what led me to get in this race in the first place, the sense that folks who were working hard were treading water, that we were becoming a country where just a few did well and so many others were struggling to get by. Problems like health care that had been escalating for decades, a lack of an energy policy that had put us in a vulnerable position every time there was turmoil in the Middle East, issues that had been lingering, but we kept on kicking down the road because we didn't have enough political will and political courage to do something about it.So, even as we were grappling with this enormous economic crisis, we did not forget those challenges that led us to start that campaign in 2008 in the first place.And so yes, we pushed and pushed and pushed, until we finally were able to pass legislation that ensures that every American is going to be able to get health care in the country and nobody is going to go bankrupt when they get sick. And already we've got 2.6 million young people who have coverage who did not have it before because of this law, seniors all across the country benefiting from lower prescription drug plan, and the promise not only of making sure health care is affordable and preventive care and mammograms and other things are available and people aren't being dropped from their health insurance when they get sick because they now have the Patient's Bill of Rights, but it also promises to actually, over time, lower health care costs, which will help reduce our deficits and help businesses and families well into the future.We kept on focusing on energy, even though we were grappling with this economic crisis, and have doubled the production of clean energy in this country from wind and solar and biodiesel. And even as we have said that we're going to have to continue to develop American energy and traditional energy sources like oil and gas, we've also said we're not going to compromise on making sure that there are strong environmental controls in place, because we want our kids having clean air and clean water. We want them growing up in the kind of country that protects and preserves its natural resources and conserves our land and this incredible bounty that God has given us.Even as we were focusing on the economy, we said, we want an America where everybody is treated fairly. So first bill I passed--equal pay for equal work. I want my daughters to be treated just like somebody else's sons when it comes to a job.And we said, given the incredible sacrifices that our military makes, we don't want your capacity to serve the country you love to be dependent on who you love. And we ended ""don't ask, don't tell,"" because that's part of fairness. That's part of who we are as Americans.Whether it was doubling fuel efficiency standards on cars--probably the most significant environmental action that's been taken in two or three decades--to making sure that student loans were more accessible to folks who are going to college, to trying to revamp our job training system so that our workers are getting the best skills in the world and can compete in this 21st century, even as we were dealing with the immediate crisis, the immediate emergency, we've tried to keep our eye on our long-term goal, which is restoring an America where everybody gets a fair shot, everybody does their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same set of rules, an America where everybody feels a sense of responsibility not only to themselves, but also to the larger community and the larger country. And we've done all this obviously with some fairly vocal opposition. [Laughter] And we've done this even as the weight of the economic crisis made it more difficult. We did this at a time when changes around the world were taking place more quickly than we've ever seen before. And so even as I was managing two wars, we also had to deal with an Arab Spring in which suddenly millions of people, especially young people, said, we want a different way of life.And there have been setbacks. There have been times where progress was not as fast as we wanted. And there's so much more work that remains to be done. We still have a broken immigration system that has to be reformed so that we are a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. We still have more work to do on energy, because the fact of the matter is that, for example, if America simply matched the energy efficiency of a country like Japan, we would lower our overall energy utilization by 20 or 25 percent. Nothing could be more important in terms of our economy and the long-term health of this planet. That's more work to do.We are going to have to make sure that we close this deficit and reduce our debt in a responsible and balanced way, which means that we get rid of programs that don't work and we evaluate carefully our spending to make sure we're getting a good bang for the buck. And we say to those who can afford to do a little bit more, like me, that you've got to be part of the solution in terms of lowering this deficit. It can't be just done on the backs of seniors or students in the forms of higher loans or more expensive Medicare.So we've still got a lot of work to do. And that's hopefully why all of you are here today. I always joke that back in 2008, if you got behind my campaign it wasn't because you thought it was a sure thing. [Laughter] Electing Barack Hussein Obama was not the--[laughter]--easy route to take. So you got involved because you had a sense of possibility, a sense of how this country could be brought together and start moving in a new direction.We've begun that process, but the journey is not complete. And although I'm a little grayer now than I was, a little dinged up--[laughter]--and some of the newness and excitement that possessed us in 2008 naturally will have dissipated. That sense of urgency and determination and the values that are at stake are no less today than they were back in 2008. If anything, it's more urgent and we have to be more determined and more energized and work even harder. And if we do, we're going to have 4 1/2 more years to change America.Thank you. Thank you, everybody.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you. Oh, I've got a little blues track going on here. I like that. Please, everybody have a seat. Instead of ruffles and flourishes, we might have to get this crew every time I come on stage. It sounded smooth. [Laughter]I want to--first of all, obviously, I want to thank Robert and Nicola and all the kids for letting us crash their house. They have been extraordinary friends and supporters for so long, and for them to help to organize this is something that means so much to me. So I want to thank them. In addition, I want to thank Reverend Al Green for taking the time to be here. I took a chance at the Apollo--[laughter]--and I'm not going to take a chance again.Audience members. Aww!The President. No. No, I'm sorry. Now, what is possible is after reelection--[laughter]--I might go on tour with the good Reverend, be his opening act. But I don't want to lose any further votes because of my singing voice. But we are greatly honored to have you here. Thank you so much.To Booker T. Jones, Les Claypool, Charlie Musselwhite, thank you so much, gentlemen, for being here. We are all big fans. We are all huge fans of your music, and it is a great honor to have you guys here. As Robert and Nicole know, the arts are part of what brings us together, what binds us together as a people. And one of the things--we're actually having a blues night next week, which is going to be part of our effort at the White House to lift up the importance of the arts in our lives and make sure that our kids understand the power of expression.And then finally, I just want to acknowledge--those of you who are going to come down to North Carolina for our outstanding convention, we've got the person who will be our host. The mayor of Charlotte, North Carolina, Anthony Foxx is here.As I look around the room, I've got some new friends, and I've got some folks who have supported me since I had just been elected to the U.S. Senate and who I've known for quite some time. All of you have been doing good work, separate and apart from my campaign, for a lot of years, making this community better, making sure that folks who are vulnerable got the help they need, making sure that our kids have a chance to excel in this globalized world, helping to promote understanding. And so we've got a lot of do-gooders in this room, and I'm grateful for everything that you guys do day in, day out.I am not going to speak long at the top, because usually in a setting like this, what I love to do is take questions and bounce things around. But I just want to reflect a little bit on where we've been over the last 3 years.We've gone through the toughest economy, the worst financial crisis, worst economic crisis, since the Great Depression, since our lifetimes--in our lifetimes. And things are still tough. There are a lot of people here in California and all across the country who are still struggling each and every day. Their homes may be underwater. They may be out of work. If they've got work, they're struggling to pay the bills. And what was true before 2008 is still true for too many today, which is the sense that their concept of the American Dream, what it means to be an American, feels like it's slipping away from them, that idea that if you work hard, if you're responsible, if you're looking out for your family and a good citizen, that you can make it, you can afford to buy a house and send your kids to school and retire with some dignity and respect, that sense was slipping away from too many people far before this economic crisis. And this economic crisis made it that much tougher.Having said that, 3 years from when I took office, America is moving on the right track. We are stronger than we were. The month that I took office, we were losing 750,000 jobs; last month we gained 250,000. That's a turnaround of a million jobs in this country. We've seen 3.7 million jobs created over the last 23 months, the strongest job growth in a long time--since 2005--and the strongest manufacturing job growth since the 1990s.An economy that was in danger of tipping into a great depression is starting to heal and rebuild itself. And our challenge right now is not just to settle for getting back to where we were in 2008. Our challenge is how do we address all those accumulated problems that helped to lead to the crisis and how do we restore a sense for folks in the middle class and those aspiring to the middle class or beyond that they've got a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and fair play reigns across the country and our core values as Americans are being respected and honored. That's what's at stake.And so, even as we were dealing with the economic crisis, we tried not, over the last 3 years, to take our eye off the larger purpose of rebuilding an economy that has a firmer foundation. And that meant making sure, for example, that people in this country don't go bankrupt when they get sick. And as tough as it was for us to be able to pass universal health care that had alluded previous Presidents--and 2.6 million young people already have health insurance now because of that law that didn't have it before, and millions of seniors across the country are seeing the cost of prescription drugs going down for them--and us setting the stage so that in my second term we will have fully implemented this law and 30 million people will have coverage that didn't have it before and prevention is covered and insurance companies can't drop people because of the fine print right when they need it the most. That's part of building an economy that's built to last.We wanted to make sure that at a time when education has never been more important, that we made sure that we started digging in and figuring out how do we guarantee every child has a decent education. And that meant taking on our friends and not just our enemies and saying, yes, we're going to put more money into the system, but we're also going to insist on reform, and we're going to do a better job training our teachers and giving them the support that they need, but also demanding some accountability, and instead of just teaching to the test, making sure that we have a way of measuring outcomes so that our young people can compete in math and science, but also the arts and the humanities.And 40 States now across the country have made significant education reforms because of our efforts--unprecedented effort at school reform over the last several years. It doesn't get a lot of notice.And then we realized, you know, it's not enough for them just to get through high school these days; they're going to have to go college. But the barriers of college costs, tuition costs have been so great we decided let's stop sending $60 billion in subsidies to the banks and let's channel that money directly into student loans and increase Pell grants so that now you've got millions of students who are less burdened by debt and have greater opportunity not just to go to 4-year colleges, but also to go to 2-year colleges, or in some cases, adults who have the capacity now to go and get retrained so that they can get back into the workforce with the new skills that they need.And we decided that if we're going to have economy built to last that we've got to finally take on energy. But it's not enough for us to just drill our way out of the problem. We recognize that we're not going to immediately transition off of fossil fuels and we've got to increase American energy production. But it can't just be oil and natural gas. We also have to make sure that we're investing in the energies of the future.And so we've doubled clean energy because of the investments that we've made, created entire industries here in the United States in things like advanced battery manufacturing. Because we understand that we can't keep on going every spring--we basically, like clockwork, say to ourselves, well, gas prices are going up and the economy is now going to be held hostage. Not to mention our concern about the planet that we're going to be leaving our kids and our grandkids.And we decided, although the global economy shifted and because manufacturing has become more efficient, we are going to have to recognize that a bigger and bigger portion of the economy will be service based, we still want America to have the best manufacturing capacity in the world, which is part of the reason why at a time when it was unpopular not just with the Republicans, but also Democrats to save the auto industry, we decided to go in there and restructure and force workers and management to work together. And GM, which was on the verge of liquidation, is now once again the number-one automaker in the world, with the highest profits that they have ever seen.And part of our commitment to that economy of the future was making sure that we restored science to its rightful place. And so we increased our investments in NIH and NSF and made sure that stem cell research could proceed, and insisted that we place the highest priority on technology and innovation--in Government, through our research--because nobody understands better than this region of the country and how important that is to our economic future.And then finally, we had to make sure that fair play meant something. And so the first bill I signed said, equal pay for equal work, because I want my daughters to have the same opportunities that anybody's sons have when they go out into the job market.And we determined that your capacity to fight for the country you love shouldn't be contingent on who you love, and we ended ""don't ask, don't tell."" Because there was something quintessentially American about treating everybody equally and judging them on the merits.And there were great predictions that this was going to be impossible to do, but we did it. And you know what, I was in Marine Base Kaneohe in Hawaii during vacation, and while I was working out at the Marine base, which is a bad idea because they're all in much better shape than you are--[laughter]--on three different occasions people came up and said, thank you for doing that. And I don't know whether they were directly impacted or they just had a fellow marine that was impacted, but they understand this makes us stronger. It doesn't make us weaker.And then, as Robert mentioned, we recognize that our strength at home has to be matched with strength abroad. But that strength is not just defined by our military might. It's also defined by our values and our diplomacy and our respect for rule of law, which is why we ended torture and why we kept our commitment to responsibly end that war in Iraq.That didn't make us weaker. It gave us the capacity to refocus our attention on those who had attacked us on 9/11. And there is a direct line between the strategic decisions we made there and our ability to begin dismantling Al Qaida and to restore a sense of respect for America all around the world that has huge dividends over the long term, so that when I took a trip to Asia, rather than feeling neglected or feeling America was no longer relevant, people were hungry for American leadership. People recognized that we remain the one indispensable nation, not just because we're big and powerful, but also because we have this idea that there are certain universal principles and universal rights and international norms that have to be observed and that we are perhaps the only superpower in history that obviously is looking out for our own self-interest, but also thinks about what's good for everybody. And that is part of our power.So we've been busy these last 3 years. And for all the difficulties and all the challenges and all the political twists and turns that this journey has taken, I'm here to report to you that all that work you did back in 2008, it's paid off. And you should feel pride and confidence in the fact that change remains possible if you're persistent, if you're focused.But I'm also here to report that you shouldn't feel complacent, because we've got a lot more to do. We've got to fully implement health care reform. We've got to fully implement financial reform. We've got to make sure that our Consumer Financial Protection Bureau that is protecting consumers for the first time isn't rolled back. We've still got to get immigration reform done, because we are a nation of immigrants and we're a nation of laws, and those two things don't contradict each other. We have to have an even more robust energy policy if we're going to create the kind of jobs in this new energy sector that are needed and we're going to deal with climate change in a serious way.We've still got to follow through on the education reforms that we're doing, and that's going to require enormous effort. And we're going to have to figure out how to pay for all this stuff. And part of fair play and everybody doing their fair share is making sure that we have an economy in which we're getting rid of programs that don't work and we're making Government more efficient. But it also means people like those of us in this room that have been unbelievably blessed can do a little bit more to make sure that kid around the corner has a chance like we did and to make sure that that senior is protected, make sure that student can get a loan that doesn't leave them broke after they graduate and to make sure that senior is able to live with dignity and respect after they retire.All these things can be accomplished, but we're going to have to feel as determined, we're going to have to be as focused as we were in 2008. And that's not going to be easy because, first of all, I'm older and I'm grayer. [Laughter] So it's not as new, it's not as trendy to be part of the Obama campaign, although some of you still have your posters, I'm sure. [Laughter] And part of it is, we've gone through 3 tough years, and so people want to hope, but they've been worn down by a lot of hardship.But as I travel around the country, I have to tell you, there's a core decency to the American people. There is a resilience to the American people. There is, under all the cynicism, a basic optimism to the American people. That's what we tapped into in 2008, and it's still there. It's still there.And if we pull together and if we work just as hard, I guarantee you that 5 years from now we're going to be able to look back and say, you know what, that change we believed in we delivered.Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, San Francisco! Thank you! Thank you! Thank you so much. Thank you, everybody. First of all, everybody, please give a huge round of applause to Patty for sharing her story. Thank you, Patty. We appreciate it.I want to thank Chris Cornell for his wonderful performance. Give Chris a big round of applause. And I want to thank Vernon Davis for being here. If you want to come and play for the Bears, you are welcome to do it. Vernon had a great playoff. I mean, he had a great playoff. Unbelievable.You guys can take a seat. Just relax. I'm going to be here a while. I'm going to be here awhile. I am going to be here awhile.So, San Francisco, I am here--I am----Audience member. [Inaudible] The President. You look great. Got the Statue of Liberty right here. [Laughter] That is outstanding.Audience member. We love you!The President. I love you back.Now, I'm here not just because I need your help, San Francisco. I am here because this country needs your help. A lot of you worked very, very hard, worked your hearts out, in 2008. And it wasn't because you thought electing Barack Hussein Obama was a sure thing. [Laughter] That wasn't guaranteed. You didn't need a poll to tell you that might be difficult. [Laughter] The campaign was not about me; it was about you, and the vision that we share for America.A vision that doesn't say we leave everything to the free market by itself, and everybody is left to fend for themselves and play by their own rules. It's a vision that says, yes, we believe in the free market and we believe in entrepreneurship and individualism. But we also believe that anybody who works hard should have the chance to get ahead, not just a few. A vision that says we're greater together than we are on our own and that everybody should get a fair shot and everybody should do their fair share and everybody should play by the same set of rules. And when we do that, then the entire country does better.The market does better. Business does better. Workers do better. Our children do better. The future is brighter. That's the vision we shared. That's the change we believed in. And we knew it wasn't going to be easy. I told you it wasn't going to be easy. [Laughter] I did. We knew it wasn't going to come quickly. But think about the journey we've traveled over the last 3 years. Because of what you did in 2008, because of your effort, we're starting to see what change looks like.Change is the first bill I signed into law, the Lilly Ledbetter Act, that says women deserve an equal day's pay for an equal day's work. That's what change is.Change is the decision we made to rescue the American auto industry from collapse, even when it wasn't popular and some people said we should let Detroit go bankrupt. With 1 million jobs on the line, I wasn't going to let that happen. And today, GM is back on top as the world's number-one automaker. It just reported the highest profits in the 100-year history of that company. With more than 200,000 new jobs created in the last 2 1/2 years, the American auto industry is back. That's change.Change is the decision we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our oil addiction and go ahead and raise our fuel efficiency standards for the first time in decades. And by the next decade, we'll be driving American-made cars that get almost 55 miles to a gallon. That's what change is.Change is the fight that we won to stop handing out over $60 billion in taxpayer subsidies to banks that issue student loans. We said, let's give that money directly to the students, and that way we can increase the number of students that are getting loans and the amount of loans that they're getting, so that millions of young people have opportunities they didn't have before.And yes, change is the health care reform bill that we passed after a century of trying, a reform that has already allowed 2.6 million young people to stay on their parent's insurance. A reform that will ensure that in the United States of America, nobody is going to go broke just because they get sick. And Americans will no longer be denied or dropped by their insurance companies just when they need care the most. That's what change is.Change is the fact that for the first time in our history, you don't have to hide who you love to serve the country you love. That's what change is. ""Don't ask, don't tell"" is over. That's change.For the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. That has changed. We refocused our efforts on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11. And thanks to the brave men and women in uniform, Al Qaida is weaker than it has ever been and bin Laden isn't around anymore. That's what change is.Now none of this change has been easy, and we still got a lot more work to do. There are still too many Americans out there that are looking for work. There are still too many families who can barely pay the bills, still see their homes underwater. We're still recovering from the worst economic situation in our lifetimes.But as tough as this economy is and has been, think about what's changed the day I took office. That month we were losing 750,000 jobs. Over the past 2 years, businesses have added about 3.7 million new jobs. Our manufacturers are creating jobs for the first time since the 1990s. Our economy is getting stronger. The recovery is accelerating. America is coming back. And the last thing we can afford to do is go back to the same policies that got us back--got us into this mess in the first place.That's what is at stake in this election. And that's what the other candidates want to do, take us back----Audience member. I love you, Obama!The President. I told you I loved you already. [Laughter]These other folks, they make no secret about where they want to go. They want to go back to the days when Wall Street played by its own rules.[At this point, there was a disruption in the audience.]Audience members. Boo!The President. We're okay. No, this is what San Francisco is always about. There's always something going on in San Francisco. Folks are not shy about sharing their ideas in San Francisco. Yes, it's fun. [Laughter]But here's what's at stake in this election. Look, the other folks--these folks who are running for President--[laughter]--that's what they're doing--[laughter]--they want to go back to the days when insurance companies could deny coverage or jack up premiums without any reason. They want to spend trillions of dollars more on tax breaks for folks like me who don't need it and aren't asking for it, even if it means adding to the deficit or gutting things like education or clean energy or basic research or Medicare. Their philosophy is simple: We are better off when everybody fends for themselves and everybody plays by their own set of rules.And I'm here to tell them they are wrong. They are wrong. Because in the United States of America, we are greater together than we are on our own. We're better off when we keep that basic American promise that if you work hard, you can do well--you can raise a family, you can own a home, send your kids to college, put a little away for retirement--and that that promise is open to everybody. If you're born into tough circumstances, we're going to give you ladders to climb up into that middle class. And if you're in that middle class, then we're going to make sure that you've got the tools to, even in a changing world, have some security and some stability in your life.That's what we're fighting for. That's the choice in this election. This is not just another political debate. This is the defining issue of our time, a make-or-break moment for middle class Americans and all those who are trying to get into it. And we can go back to an economy that's based on outsourcing and bad debt or phony financial profits, or we can fight for an economy that is built to last, an economy built on American manufacturing and American-made energy and skills and education for American workers and the values that have made America great: hard work and fair play and shared responsibility. That is what we're fighting for. That's what's at stake in this election.I want to make sure the next generation of manufacturing isn't taking root just in Asia or Europe. I want it taking root in factories in Detroit and Pittsburgh and Cleveland and California. I don't want this Nation to be known just for buying and consuming stuff. I want to be known for building and selling products all over the world. And I want to stop rewarding businesses that are shipping jobs overseas. I want to reward companies that are investing here in the United States and creating jobs all throughout this country.I want to make our schools the envy of the world, and that starts with the men and women who are in front of the classroom. A good teacher--we've got some teachers here? I want to say thank you to you. A good teacher can increase the lifetime income of a classroom by over $250,000. A great teacher can offer a path, an escape for a child who is born into really tough circumstances.I don't want to hear folks in Washington bashing teachers, but I also don't want them just defending the status quo because too many kids aren't making it. So I want us to pull together and give schools the resources they need to keep good teachers on the job and reward the best ones. And in return, let's grant schools the flexibility to teach with creativity and with passion and not just teach to the test, but also to say to teachers who aren't doing the job, you know what, you got to improve or we're going to find somebody else.And when kids do graduate, you heard from Patty, the cost of college just keeps on going up and up and up. At a time when more Americans owe more in tuition debt than credit card debt, this Congress has to take some immediate steps. We got to stop interest rates on student loans from doubling in July, which it's scheduled to do. This Congress needs to keep in place the tuition tax credits we've already put into place.But colleges and universities, they've got to do their part. And I said this at the State of the Union: If you can't stop tuition from going up, the funding that you get from taxpayers needs to go down, because we've got to incentivize colleges and universities to do the right thing. Higher education can't be a luxury. It is an economic imperative that every family in America should be able to afford. That's what we're going to work for.I want an economy that supports our scientists and our researchers who are trying to make sure the next breakthrough in clean energy happens right here in the United States of America. We have subsidized oil companies long enough. It's time to end nearly 100 years of taxpayer subsidies to an oil industry that's never been more profitable and double down on a clean energy that's never been more promising: solar and wind and biofuels and electric vehicles. We can make progress and create jobs and get ahead of the curve, not be behind it.We need to give our businesses the best access to newer roads and airports and faster railroads, Internet access. I was telling somebody the other day, I'm a chauvinist; I want America to have the best stuff. [Laughter] I want us to have the best airports and the best roads. I want us to have the fastest broadband lines. And we can do that. It's time to take the money we are no longer spending in Iraq, use half of that to pay down our debt and use the rest to do some nation-building right here at home.And we've got to make sure we have a tax system that reflects everybody doing their fair share. I've talked about the Buffett rule: If you make more than a million dollars a year, you shouldn't pay a lower tax rate than your secretary. That's a pretty simple concept to understand. Now, if, like 98 percent of American families, you make less than $250,000 a year, your taxes shouldn't go up.This is not class warfare. It has nothing to do with envy. It's simple math. If somebody like me is getting a tax break that I don't need, then two things can happen. Either the deficit goes up further, our debt increases, or alternatively, we are balancing our budget on the backs of seniors who are paying more for Medicare, or students who are paying more for their student loans, or a veteran who really needs help, or a family trying to get by. Why would I ask them to sacrifice and I do nothing when this country has blessed me like no other country could ever do? That's not right. That's not who we are.We're only here because somebody, somewhere felt a responsibility to each other and to our country's future. Our story has never been about what we do alone. It's about what we can do together. That's why we won't win the competition for new jobs and new businesses and middle class security, we will not be as competitive as we need to be in this 21st-century economy, the market will not work as well if we just respond to these same economic challenges with the same old you're-on-your-own economics.It just doesn't work. In fact, it's never worked. It didn't work in the decade before the Great Depression. It didn't work when we tried it during the last decade. Why do we think it would work now? It's not as if we didn't try it. We tried it. It didn't work. And middle class families lost more and more ground. And those folks trying to get in the middle class saw those ladders to success erode. We saw it.That's part of what our campaign in 2008 was about. That's what we're trying to reverse. And we've begun to make progress, but we've got a lot more work to do. We got to build an economy that lasts because we've all got a stake in each other's success.Look, think about it this way: If we attract an outstanding teacher to their--to the teaching profession by giving her the pay she deserves and the support that she needs, and that teacher goes on and educates the next Steve Jobs, we all benefit; America is stronger. That was a good investment. We get a good return. If we provide faster Internet service to some rural part of America that doesn't have it right now and suddenly there's a store owner there who is able to connect with the global economy and start selling their stuff around the world, that benefits us. It makes our country stronger. If we build a new bridge that saves a shipping company time and money, workers and customers all over the country end up doing better.This is not a Democratic idea or a Republican idea. It was a Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, the first Republican President, who launched the transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Sciences, the first land-grant colleges in the midst of a Civil War. Republican Teddy Roosevelt called for a progressive income tax, carved out land to conserve for future generations. It was a Republican, Dwight Eisenhower, who built the Interstate Highway System. And with the help of Republicans in Congress, FDR was able to give millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, the chance to go to college on the GI bill.This is an American idea, and sometimes the other side seems to have lost its way. It doesn't seem to remember these are American ideas. That sense of common purpose and that spirit of common purpose still exists today. In Washington, sometimes the political rhetoric, it's all about us and them. And the notion is if it wasn't for them, everyone would be okay. And then, the circle of who is us gets smaller. [Laughter] But you know, that's Washington. In America, that spirit is still there. It's there when you talk to people on main streets and town halls, if you go to VFW halls. It's there when you talk to our members of the Armed Forces. It's there in places of worship.Our politics may be divided, but if you watched cable TV you'd think we're all tearing at each other's throats. But most Americans, they still understand we are greater together, that no matter who we are, no matter where we come from--Black, White, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, rich or poor--we rise or fall as one Nation and one people. That's what people understand. That's the politics that we built in 2008. That's what's at stake right now. That's what this election is all about.I know these last 3 years have been tough. I know the change that we fought for in 2008 has come in fits and starts and sometimes it hasn't come as fast as folks wanted. We've had setbacks. I've made mistakes. After all that's happened in Washington, I know it's tempting sometimes to believe that maybe what we imagined isn't possible. But remember what we used to say during the campaign, that real change, big change is hard and it takes time. And it takes more than a single term. And it takes more than a single President. What it requires is ordinary citizens who come together with a shared vision and who are committed and persistent and just stay at it and keep fighting and keep pushing and inching this country closer and closer and closer to our highest ideals.And I said in 2008, I'm not a perfect man and I will not be a perfect President. But I promised you then that I would always tell you what I thought, I would always tell you where I stood, and I would wake up every single day fighting for you as hard as I know how. And I have kept that promise.And so if you're willing to stand with me and keep pushing and keep fighting and keep believing and, yes, keep hoping, then change will come. If you're willing to work even harder than you were in 2008, then we're going to finish what we started. Stand with me, walk with me, organize with me, hope with me, and we will remind the world just why it is that America is the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you, and God bless this country of ours.",2008,obama
"Hello, Bellevue! Hello, Seattle! It is good to be here back in the Pacific Northwest. Everybody can have a seat. I'm going to be talking for a while. [Laughter]Let me start by just saying thank you to Peter for sharing his story. I love bookstores, so it was fun hearing how he's coming back. And we are very grateful to him and small-business owners all across the country who, every day, are getting up and doing what's required to make payroll and support a lot of families out there.We also have somebody who's doing an outstanding job in public service. Your outstanding Governor, Chris Gregoire, is in the house. And your Lieutenant Governor, Brad Owens, is here. Or he was here. There he is over there. Good to see you, Brad.I am here as well. I'm here because not only do I need your help, but I'm here because your country needs your help. There are so many reasons why a lot of you worked hard, worked your hearts out, in the 2008 campaign. It was not because my election was preordained. Electing Barack Hussein Obama was not, like, the odds-on favorite thing to happen. [Laughter] You didn't need a poll to know that could be tricky. [Laughter]You joined it because the campaign wasn't simply about me. It was because of a shared vision that we had about the kind of country we want for not just ourselves, but our kids and our grandkids, a vision that doesn't assume a few people doing really well at the top and then everybody else struggling to get by. It was a vision that was inclusive and bold and generous, and it says here in America everybody who works hard has a chance to get ahead, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like. It's a vision that says we're greater together than we are on our own and that when everybody gets a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules, that's when America progresses.That's the vision that we shared. That's the change we believed in. We knew it wasn't going to be easy. We knew it wasn't going to come quickly. But think about what's happened over these last 3 years. With all the opposition that we've had, with all the challenges we face, think about what's happened because of what you did in 2008. Think about what change looks like.The first bill I signed into law, a law that says women deserve an equal day's pay for an equal day's work, so our daughters are treated the same as our sons, that's what change is.Our decision to rescue the American auto industry from collapse, even when there were a bunch of politicians saying we should let Detroit go bankrupt, and now, because we didn't let a million jobs go, today GM is back on top as the world's number-one automaker, just reported the highest profits in its 100-year history, and with more than 200,000 new jobs created in the last 2 1/2 years, the American auto industry is back. That's what change is. That's what you did.Change is the decision we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our oil addiction and finally raise our fuel efficiency standards. And now, by the next decade, we'll be driving American-made cars that get almost 55 miles to the gallon, and trucks for the first time are covered. That's what change is: doubling fuel efficiency standards on cars. That's because of you--because of you.Change is the fight we had to stop handing over $60 billion to banks in the student loan program and say let's cut out the middleman, let's give that money directly to students. And as a consequence, we've got millions of young people who are benefiting from less debt and greater college affordability. That happened because of you.Because of you, we were able to put middle class tax cuts in the back pockets of working Americans every single year I've been in office. And today Congress did the right thing and extended the payroll tax cut for working Americans through the rest of the year. That's about a thousand dollars for the typical American family. And that's part of what lifted the economy when it was on the verge of a great depression. That's what change is.And yes, change is the health care reform bill we passed after a century of trying. That's a reform that will finally ensure that in the United States of America, nobody goes broke because they get sick. And already, 2.5 million young people have health insurance today because the law allows them to stay on their parent's plan. And because of this law, Americans no longer can be denied or dropped by their insurance companies when they need care the most. That's what change is.Change is the fact that, for the first time in our history, it doesn't matter who you love, you can still serve the country you love, because ""don't ask, don't tell"" is finally over.And change is keeping another promise. For the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. And we've refocused our efforts on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11. And thanks to the brave men and women in uniform, Al Qaida is weaker than it has ever been and Usama bin Laden is no longer a threat to the United States of America. That's what change is.Now, none of this change was easy. And we've got so much more work we have to do. There are so many Americans out there that are still looking for work and so many families that are still struggling to pay the bills or make their mortgage payment, and we're still recovering from the worst economic crisis in our lifetimes. But over the past 2 years, businesses have added about 3.7 million jobs. Our manufacturers are creating the most jobs since the 1990s. Our economy is getting stronger.The recovery is accelerating. America is coming back, which means the last thing we can do is go back to the same failed policies, the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. And that's what's at stake in this election. That's exactly what the other candidates want to do. They don't make any secret about it. They want to go back to the days when Wall Street played by its own rules. They want to go back to the days when insurance companies could deny you coverage or jack up premiums without reason. They want to go back to spend trillions of dollars more on tax breaks for folks like me, for the wealthiest Americans, even if it means adding to the deficit or gutting things like education or clean energy or making Medicare more expensive for seniors.The philosophy is simple: We are better off when everybody else is left to fend for themselves and the most powerful can write their own rules. And they're wrong. That's not how America was built. In the United States of America, we're greater together than we are on our own. And we are going to keep that basic promise that if you work hard, you can raise a family and send your kids to college and put a little away for retirement. That's what we're going to be fighting for. That's the choice in this election.This isn't just another political debate. This is the defining issue of our time, a make-or-break moment for middle class Americans and those who want to get into the middle class. We could go back to an economy that's built on outsourcing and debt and phony financial profits. That's an option. But we got a better option: We can fight for an economy that's built to last, an economy that's based on American manufacturing and American-made energy and American innovation and skills and education for American workers and the values that have always made this country great: hard work and fair play and shared responsibility. That's what we're fighting for. That's what this election's about. That's why you're here tonight.We need to make sure that the next generation of manufacturing, companies like Boeing, take root not in Asia, not in Europe, but in factories of Detroit, Pittsburgh, and Cleveland, here in Washington State. I don't want this Nation to just be known for buying and consuming. I want us to be known for building and selling products all around the world. And part of that means we've got to stop rewarding companies that ship jobs overseas and start rewarding companies that create jobs right here in the United States. We've got to change our Tax Code to incentivize investment here. It means we have to make our schools the envy of the world, which starts, by the way, with the man or woman in front of the classroom. A good teacher can increase the lifetime earnings of a classroom by over $250,000. A great teacher offers a path for a child to go where their dreams might carry them even if they're born into poverty, even if they've got tough circumstances.So I don't want to hear folks in Washington bashing teachers; I don't want to hear them defending the status quo. I want us to give schools the resources they need to hire good teachers and keep good teachers and reward the best teachers. And in return, I want to give schools the flexibility to teach with creativity and passion and still maintain accountability. Stop teaching to the test, but still make sure that teachers are meeting high standards and replace those who aren't helping our kids learn. That's what we're fighting for. That's a vision of America of shared responsibility.And when kids do graduate, I want them to be able to afford to go to college. Americans now owe more tuition debt than credit card debt, which means, for starters, this Congress needs to stop the interest rates on student loans from doubling in July, which is what's scheduled to happen. But that's just the start. Colleges and universities have to do their part.I said in the State of the Union, we want to give incentives to colleges and universities, and we will help them contain their costs, and State legislatures are going to have to do the same thing. Because my attitude is if colleges and universities that are supposed to be serving students are pricing themselves so that students can't go, then fundings from taxpayers should go down. Higher education can't be a luxury. It's an economic imperative that every family in America should be able to afford. And if we are persistent and creative about it, we can make that happen.An economy built to last is one where we support science and scientists and researchers that are making the next breakthroughs in clean energy right here in the United States of America. We are a nation of inventors and tinkerers. We come up with new ideas, and we try things that the world hasn't seen before. And that has to be an area where we are thinking not just about now, but we're thinking about tomorrow and the next generation. And nowhere is that truer than when it comes to energy.We've subsidized oil companies for nearly a hundred years. It's time to end a hundred years of taxpayer giveaways to an industry that's rarely been more profitable so we can double down on the clean energy industry that has never been more promising, in solar power and wind power and biofuels. That's good for our economy, it's good for our national security, and it is good for the planet. And that is part of what's at stake in this election.I want us to rebuild in America. I'm a chauvinist; I want America to have the best stuff. I don't want to go to China and see their airports better than ours. I don't want to go to Europe and see that they've got faster high-speed rail than we do. I want to give our businesses and our people the best access to newer roads and airports and the fastest railways and the best Internet access. We should--and I've proposed this--let's take the money that we are no longer spending in Iraq, use half of that to pay down our debt, use the rest of it to do some nation-building here at home. Let's put people to work here at home rebuilding this Nation.Now, even if we do that, we're still going to have to bring down our deficit and our debt. And that comes to the issue of everybody doing their fair share. We need a tax system that reflects our best values, everybody carrying their weight. I believe we should follow the Buffett rule: If you make more than $1 million a year, you shouldn't pay a lower tax rate than your secretary. If, like 98 percent of Americans, you make $250,000 a year or less, your taxes don't need to go up right now--period.This has nothing to do with class warfare. It has nothing to do with envy. It has everything to do with math. [Laughter] If somebody likes--if somebody like me gets a tax break that I don't need, wasn't asking for, at a time when we're trying to get our fiscal house in order, then one of two things happens. Either that adds to our deficit, or alternatively, we've got to take something else away from somebody else. Maybe a student suddenly has to pay higher interest on their student loans or a senior has got to pay more for their Medicare or a homeless veteran doesn't get the support that they need or a family doesn't have the opportunity to get the kind of job training they need to adapt in this changing economy.Those are the choices. And the notion that we would ask sacrifice from folks who are already struggling in order to protect folks who have never been better--never been better off--that's not who we are.Every one of us, we're here because somebody else, somewhere, was looking out for us and looking out for the country, taking responsibility for the future, made an investment in us. I don't care how successful you are, you didn't do it just on your own. And here in America, our story has never been about what we do just on our own; it's about what we do together.Yes, we are rugged individualists, and we expect everybody to carry their weight and work hard and take responsibility for yourself and your family. But we also recognize that for all of us to succeed, we have to have an investment in each other's success. We won't win the competition for new jobs and new businesses and middle class security if we just respond to the same economic challenges with the same, old, you're-on-your-own economics. It doesn't work. We've tried it. It didn't work in the Depression, it didn't work in the last decade, it won't work now.So, if we're going to build an economy that's built to last, we've got to have a stake in each other's success and we've got to think about the future. And think about it, this is something everybody here understands instinctually. If we attract an outstanding teacher to the profession by giving teachers the pay they deserve and the training and professional development they deserve, and that teacher goes on to educate the next Bill Gates, we all benefit. If we provide faster Internet to a rural part of Washington, and suddenly that storeowner can sell his or her goods around the world, that makes everybody better off here in the State of Washington and in the United States. If we build a new bridge that saves a shipping company time or money, workers and customers everywhere are going to be better off. We'll be more competitive.This idea is not a Democratic idea or a Republican idea. It's an American idea. The first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, he launched the transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Science, the first land-grant colleges in the middle of a Civil War, because he understood that for us to succeed, we've got to invest in the future. A Republican, Teddy Roosevelt, called for a progressive income tax. Dwight Eisenhower built the Interstate Highway System. It was with the help of Republicans in Congress that FDR gave millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, a chance to go to college on the GI bill.That spirit of common purpose, that's still at the heart of the American experience. It still exists today. Maybe not in Washington, but as I travel around the country, I know it's there. You hear it. You see it. It's there when you talk to folks on Main Street or in town halls. It's certainly there when you talk to members of our Armed Forces, when you talk to somebody who's out there coaching Little League or in their place of worship, volunteering and helping people that are less fortunate.Our politics sometimes seems just so divided, almost irrational. And obviously, that gets a lot of attention because conflict sells newspapers, attracts viewers. But most Americans understand that for all our differences, what binds us together is more important. No matter who we are--Black, White, Latino, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, rich, poor, disabled or not--we rise and fall as one Nation and as one people. And that's what this election's about.It's been a tough 3 years, and the change we fought for in 2008 didn't always come fast and didn't always come easy. And after all that's happened in Washington and all the noise and sound and fury, I know it's tempting sometimes to believe, well, maybe the vision we had is beyond our grasp. But I remind all of you, those of you who were involved in 2008, or even those of you who were just casual observers at the time, I said big change, real change is hard. It takes time. It takes more than a single term. And it may take more than a single President. It takes ordinary citizens who are committed to fighting and pushing and inching this country, day by day, week by week, month by month, year by year, towards our highest ideals.And I told you then, I may not be a perfect man and I will never be a perfect President, but I pledged that I would always tell you what I thought and where I stood, and I would wake up every single day fighting for you as hard as I know how. And I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise. That promise I've kept.And if you're willing to push with me through all the obstacles and keep reaching for that vision of a better America, then change will come.Thank you very much, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"The President. That was a one-time affair. The fewer the shows, the higher the admission. [Laughter]But first of all, I just want to thank Jeff and Susan for opening up their extraordinary home. We're thrilled to be here. It is wonderful to be back in the Pacific Northwest. I was reminding some folks who may not know, I've got Seattle roots. My mother went to Puget Sound High School. Audience members. Mercer Island.The President. They lived in Puget Sound and went to Mercer Island High School. Some of you did not know this. But that's why I love this place, every time I come up.So many of you have been extraordinary friends in the past. More importantly, so many of you have done such important philanthropic work and charitable work that in some ways you guys just feel like a bunch of old friends, and I don't want to spend too much time giving a long speech at the front end. I want to spend more of our time in discussion. But maybe what I can do is give you a sense of where I think the country is right and give you a sense of where we need to go over the next 5 years.We've obviously gone through the toughest 3 years in my lifetime, the toughest 3 years economically since the Great Depression. The month I was sworn in, we were losing 750,000 jobs a month. We had lost 4 million jobs in the 6 months before I was sworn into office. We would lose another 4 million in the 6 months after I was sworn in, before our economic policies had a chance to take effect. The housing market was decimated. People lost jobs. They saw their homes underwater, in some cases hundreds of thousands of dollars, where they would never probably recover all the equity in their homes.And so there has obviously been a lot of pain and a lot of hardship for a lot of families for a long time, and that's not over. There are people in this region of the country, like communities all across America, that are still hurting, folks who are still looking for work, still struggling to get by, still having a tough time paying the bills.At the same time, though, what we're starting to see is the incredible resilience of the American people and the American economy. So, this month, we saw 250,000 jobs created. I'm sure some of it had to do with Microsoft. [Laughter] That's a million-job swing. We've now had 23 consecutive months of job growth, about 3.7 million jobs being created, the highest manufacturing job growth since the 1990s. And you get a sense as you talk to small businesses, large businesses, people across the country, there is a sense that we may have gotten through the heaviest storms.But what is also true is that when I ran for office in 2008, my goal wasn't simply to get us back to where we were. We had decades of challenges that had been accumulating that nobody attended to. And what I determined was, in addition to righting the ship, in addition to making sure we didn't tip into a great depression, that we stayed focused on those things that are going to ensure that this country is competitive, but that it is also a country where no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, you can still make it if you try, that that central American promise that's based on everybody getting a fair shot, everybody doing their fair share, and all of us playing by the same set of rules--that we had to rebuild that foundation for an economy that was built to last.And so, even as we were working to stem a crisis, we were still focused on some long-term issues. Health care: The fact that we spent 17 percent of our GDP on health care--every other advanced industrial country spends 11 percent on average and gets better outcomes--was unsustainable. And so as difficult as it was, we pushed through reforms that not only are going to give 30 million people without health insurance health insurance, that not only are currently providing 2.6 million young people health insurance because they can stay on their parents' plans, but that promises actually to start bending the cost curve because we've changed delivery systems and we changed incentives within this incredibly complicated piece of our economy in a way that will save businesses and families and ultimately both Federal and State governments a whole lot of money and make us better equipped to meet the challenges of the 21st century.Education: We said that we keep on issuing reports and talking about how important it is, and every President is the education President, but we don't seem to make real progress, partly because there was an ideological division between Democrats and Republicans--Republicans saying the public schools don't work and teachers unions are the problem and let's tear them down, and Democrats saying the only problem is not enough money, but we don't want to initiate real changes.And what we were able to do was to break through that logjam. Through programs like Race to the Top, we now have a situation where we're putting more money into education, but we're also asking for accountability. We're saying more resources and more reform, that we are going to respect, in fact elevate, teachers, because the single most important criteria for whether our kids succeed is that person standing in front of the classroom. And we're going to give them more flexibility, make sure they don't teach to the test, so that they can teach with creativity and passion, but we're also going to insist on greater accountability and high standards, because that's the only way we're going to succeed.And then we said it's not going to be enough if they just graduate from high school. So, even though we got 40 States to initiate K-12 reform, we said we've got to do more with community colleges and higher education. And the biggest barrier, in addition to performance in K-12, is financial. And so we took $60 billion that was being funneled to banks to manage to student loans programs, and we said, you know what, let's cut out the middleman and take that $60 billion, and now millions of kids all across the country are able to afford college that they couldn't afford before.And we said, let's stop--let's not stop there. We need more scientists and mathematicians and engineers. This group knows a little something about that. And so working not only in the public sector, but the private sector, we've initiated a whole range of programs to start elevating and lifting up the importance of STEM education and redesigning how it's taught, so that my daughters are starting to get interested in math and science early. We're not waiting until it's too late.Well, we still had to do something about energy. And although we were not able to get, at this stage, the kind of climate legislation that, I think, is ultimately going to be necessary, we were able, without a lot of fanfare, to initiate the most significant environmental legislation probably since the Clean Air Act by doubling fuel efficiency standards on cars and trucks and heavy trucks, which is not only good for our environment, but good for our economy.And what we've also started to say is, is that we've got to have an even bolder program to get the low-hanging fruit when it comes to our energy challenges, and that's making everything more energy efficient. If we had the energy efficiency that exists in Japan right now, we would lower our energy consumption by 20 percent. It's remarkable. It's doable. It doesn't require new technologies.Ultimately, Bill Gates is right. What we need to actually solve the problem is a massive technological breakthrough. But for us to spend the next 10, 20 years focused on what we know we can do right now, even as we're investing in the basic research, is critical.And then we said, on the international front, if we're going to adapt to a changing world, we're going to have to wind down one war that probably should not have been fought in the first place. We've got to transition another war so that Afghans start taking more responsibility, and we have to stay focused on the folks who actually did us harm. And as difficult as that's been over the last three years, we were able to effectuate the plan and the promise that I made back in 2008.Across the board, we have made tough decisions, whether it's saving the auto industry or making sure that we have a health care system that actually works for our economy. And there have been times, let's face it, during the last 3 years, where some of you have said, hmm, I'm not sure it's working out. But what we've always been convinced of, what I've always been convinced of, is that if we sustain this effort, even in the face of huge political obstacles, that eventually not only would the economy come back, but eventually, our politics would align with common sense and our traditions of hard work and mutual responsibility, the basic idea that, yes, we're rugged individualists and we're entrepreneurs and we focus on what we can accomplish on our own and we don't ask for handouts or expect anybody to do anything for us, but we're also part of something bigger, part of neighborhoods and communities and a United States of America, and that if we keep that in mind, then there's nothing we can't accomplish.Now, this election is not going to be as sexy as 2008. [Laughter] You know, my hair is grayer. I've got little dings and bruises--although you're right, I can still sing. [Laughter] It's not going to be as new as it was in 2008. But I have to tell you, the stakes are so much higher, in some ways.I think in 2008, everybody recognized, there was unanimity that change had to happen. And frankly, I think that I had a very capable Democratic opponent who also could have won. In this situation, we've got fundamentally different visions about the direction where our country is going, fundamentally different visions between us and the [other]* party's. Never has it been as probably as stark, in my lifetime, as it is now. Because on every single issue, you've got a party that says they are not willing to balance our budget, even if you've got a 10-to-1 deal, spending cuts to tax increases.We've got a party that denies climate change even exists rather than debates how do we best address it. We've got a party that, when it comes to foreign policy, seems to only talk about military adventures and never seems to talk about how can we create a diplomatic climate that allows the world to organize itself to ensure mutual security and prosperity.Across the board, I have not seen in my lifetime as stark a choice as we've got in 2012. And that means we're going to have to work harder this time than we did last time. If you agree with Mr. Gates here, who's spoken so eloquently about the fact that we've got to have a balanced approach to how we reduce our deficits, well, this is for all the marbles right here. Because the Bush tax cuts are going to expire at the end of this year, and whoever is the President is going to shape what our tax policy is and how we reduce our deficits and how we maintain fiscal stability for the next 20, 30 years.And unless you think that it makes sense for us to cut basic research by 35 percent and education support from the Federal Government by 35 percent and add about $6,000 of additional costs on every senior, whether they can afford it or not, for Medicare and Medicaid, then this election is going to require a lot of work.I'm optimistic that the American people want common sense. I'm optimistic that the American people want balance. I'm optimistic the American people don't want to just think about the next election, they want us to think about the next generation. But we're going to have to fight for that. And I have to tell you that it is true I look a little older, but in some ways my determination is even greater now than it was in 2008.One of the great things about occupying this job is that every single day, you're wrestling with these enormous, sometimes seemingly insoluble problems, right? Nothing hits my desk if it was easy to solve because then somebody else would have solved it. [Laughter] But in addition to just being fascinating, what's also amazing about this job is you're able to see sort of the spectrum of American life.There's not an inch of this country that I haven't seen. There's not a group of people I haven't talked to. And that's an enormous source of inspiration and optimism. We've got really good people, and we have to make sure that we've got a Government that is reflective of their core decency. That's what we're fighting for, that's what this is all about. And the fact that you're joining me here today is just one more reason why I feel encouraged. So let me stop there.Thank you.",2008,obama
"Thank you. Well, good afternoon, everybody. What a spectacular setting and a beautiful evening. I want to thank Chris and Irene and the whole Korge family. You guys have been great friends for a really long time. So please give them a big round of applause.You have one of the finest Senators in the country, Bill Nelson. I expect you to send him back to Washington. Plus, he's an astronaut. I always say this. [Laughter] You know, there are a lot of folks who are Senators; there aren't that many astronauts. So we are so proud of him. And what can I say about Debbie Wasserman Schultz? She is tireless, she is smart, and she is just fearless. And so we could not have a better person to help lead the party.And to so many of you who have been supportive for so long, all the people that Chris mentioned, but a lot of folks who are here who have worked tirelessly not only on behalf of my campaign, but on behalf of good causes here in Florida and around the country, I am grateful to all of you.I just noticed, by the way, we've got one other person that needs to be acknowledged because some of you will be spending some time with him in September, and that is the mayor of Charlotte, North Carolina, our host for the Democratic National Convention, Anthony Foxx is in the house.Now, in settings like this, where I'm among friends, I try to not speak long at the top because I want to spend most of my time in a conversation with you, in answering questions and getting ideas and comments from you. And part of the reason I don't have to speak long at the top is because Chris stole a bunch of my lines. [Laughter]Think about where we were in 2008. And sometimes people forget. The stock market was in a freefall. We were losing 750,000 jobs a month. The bottom had fallen off of the housing market. The entire financial system was locked up. Blue-chip companies couldn't borrow money. And people weren't certain whether we were going to spiral into a Great Depression.Three years later, instead of losing 750,000 jobs a month, we created 250,000 last month. Over the last 2 years, we've created 3.7 million jobs in the private sector. And we've actually seen manufacturing job growth for the first time since the 1990s. So the economy is moving in the right direction. We've got some headwinds: Europe is still weak; gas prices are a huge burden on families. But overall, considering where we were and where we could have been, I think most Americans recognize that things have stabilized and we're moving in a better direction.The challenge we have is we don't want to just get back to where we were, because part of what led me to run in the first place was the recognition that for too many families, the middle class idea, the American Dream was slipping away. Wages were stagnant. A few of us were doing very well, including most of us who are here today. But there were a whole bunch of folks who were having trouble just hanging on to their home, hanging on to the idea of sending their kids to college. And those who wanted to get in the middle class, who wanted to follow the same path that so many of our families, our parents, our grandparents followed--working hard, playing by the rules, dreaming big dreams--those ladders were being taken away from too many people.So what we've done, even as we focused on the economy, was also to say, what are those ingredients that are going to make sure that America has an economy that's built to last over the long term? And that means resuscitating, reviving American manufacturing, which is why I am so proud of what's happened in the auto industry, because it's an example of what can happen in manufacturing across the board. We had some folks who said let's let that die. Instead, GM is back to number one, seeing the greatest profits that it's seen in its history, hired back tens of thousands of workers. And that's true across the U.S. auto industry.We said that we've got to start developing American energy. We've doubled clean energy since I've been President. And even as we've increased production of oil, we've recognized we've got to transition so that our kids and our grandkids are able to enjoy not only economic growth and not be dependent on what's happening in the Middle East or someplace else, but also we're able to protect the planet.We said that we've got to focus on American skills and education. And we now have 40 States that have initiated reforms because of what we did. And college is more accessible to more young people--millions of young people--because of policies that we put forward.And at the same time, we said we've got to make sure that America is fair, that everybody gets a fair shot, which means that you don't have to worry about who you love to serve the country that you love, and we ended ""don't ask, don't tell."" It means that the first bill I signed into law said equal pay for equal work. I want my daughters paid the same as your sons when they get a job.And it means that we have a tax system that encourages economic growth, that helps to bring down our deficit, that pays for the investments that we need and says folks like me can afford to do a little bit more, that it doesn't make sense to give me tax breaks I don't need if it means making some senior citizen pay more for her Medicare or making a student pay more for their student load or a veteran maybe doesn't get the kind of help that they need coming home and they've got posttraumatic stress disorder.Internationally, I promised to end one war; it's ended. We're transitioning to end another one. We've restored respect for the United States around the world. And don't take my word for it. If any of you do international business, they will tell you that the attitude about America is fundamentally different now than it was when we first took office. And that makes us safer. And we've been able to do that without lessening the pressure--in fact, increasing the pressure--on those who carried out 9/11 and threatened to do us the most harm, which is why Al Qaida is on the ropes and bin Laden is no more. So we've got a good story to tell about the last 3 years, but I'm not done yet. I need 5 more years. We need 5 more years to reform an immigration system that doesn't work and make sure that we are a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. We need 5 more years because we still have to implement energy policies that work for everybody. And that means continuing to push on clean energy and energy efficiency.I was over at the University of Miami, where these amazing engineering students are helping businesses right now save millions of dollars just by making their physical plants and equipment more energy efficient.That's more work to do. We've got to follow through and implement health care reform legislation so that 30 million people have health insurance who wouldn't otherwise have it and to make sure that 2.5 million young people who already have health care because of that health care bill--because they can stay on their parents' health insurance--that they don't lose it.We're going to have to make sure that we effectively implement Wall Street reform. I want our financial sector to be the most vibrant in the world, but I also want it to not engage in the kind of recklessness that may lead to another big bailout. We can't afford it.And we're going to have to continue to invest in our infrastructure: the Port of Miami, all across the country, roads, bridges, airports, school buildings, science labs.There's so much more that we've got to do, and I'm only going to be able to do it because of you. You are going to have to send back Bill Nelson. You're going to have to elect Mr. Murphy. We're going to need strong partners in Congress, but--well, Debbie is probably--I don't know, what are you, 30 in the polls? [Laughter]But the most important thing I'm going to need is all of you sustaining that same sense of hope and vision for the future that led you to get involved in that campaign back in 2008. And if you do that, we can't lose. Because the American people, they have deep in their core, deep in their gut, a belief that we are all in this together, that we look out for one another, that our country is at its best when everybody, regardless of what you look like, where you come from, what your last name is, what your sexual orientation is, regardless of who you are, you deserve a fair shot in life.That's what America is about. That's what we're fighting for. That's what this election is going to be about. And that's why I'm grateful for your help.Thanks, everybody. And thank you to the staff back there for all the great help. I appreciate you.",2008,obama
"Hello, hello! Hello, Miami! It is good to see all of you. Thank you so much. Everybody, please have a seat. Thank you.First of all, I just want you to know that I am resentful I'm not going to the game tonight. [Laughter] I am mad about that. It's not right. It's not fair. [Laughter] The--but I wish you guys all the best.I want to, first of all, acknowledge a couple of people who are in the audience. First of all, you just heard from somebody who I don't know where she gets her energy from--[laughter]--but is just doing a remarkable job as our DNC chair--Debbie Wasserman Schultz. Give her a big round of applause. Your senior Senator, who I expect to--you will send back to Washington, Bill Nelson is in the house. And my great friend and Florida finance chair, Kirk Wagar is here.And of course, all of you are here. And this is a good-looking crowd. [Laughter]Audience member. [Inaudible]The President. You, especially. [Laughter] You're all raising your hand--""Yes, that's me."" [Laughter]Miami, I am here today not just because I need your help, although I do. But I'm here because your country needs your help. There was a reason that so many of you got involved in the campaign back in 2008, and it wasn't because Barack Obama was a sure thing in the campaign. When you're named Barack Hussein Obama, the odds are not in your favor--[laughter]--in any election campaign. The reason you got involved was not because of me.The reason you got involved was because we had a shared vision about what America could be, what America should be. We had an idea of a shared vision of an America in which everybody who works hard, everybody who has a vision of where they want to take their life, they can succeed. Doesn't matter where you come from, doesn't matter what you look like, doesn't matter what your name is. That idea that if you worked hard and took responsibility, that you could buy a home and send your kids to college and retire with dignity and respect, put a little bit away, that core American Dream felt like it was slipping away for too many people all across the country.And we shared a vision in which we started making good decisions about energy and health care and education. And instead of trying to divide the country, we tried to bring it together--and that we could assure that America for the next generation and generations to come. That's why you got involved, because of that shared vision we had for America.Now, 3 years later, I'm a little grayer--[laughter]--I'm a little dinged up here and there. But the message I have for you is that because of you, that change that you believed in has begun to happen. As tough as these last 3 years have been, think about everything that we've accomplished together.Because of you, we averted a great depression. When I took office, 750,000 jobs were being lost every month. Last month, we gained 250,000 jobs. We are moving the economy in the right direction. That's because of you.Because of you, there are millions of people around the country who didn't have health care and either already have health care or will soon have health care and will never again have to think about going bankrupt just because they get sick. That happened because of you.Because of you, we were able to take $60 billion that was going to subsidize banks in the student loan program, and we said, why aren't we sending that money directly to students? And as a consequence, we now have millions of young people all across the country who are getting higher Pell grants or are eligible for Pell grants for the first time or are seeing their student loan interest rates lower have access to college and the keys to the American Dream. That happened because of you. That's what change is.Change is the decision to rescue the American auto industry from collapse. You remember there were a lot of people who didn't believe in that. Even when some politicians said we should just let Detroit go bankrupt, we stepped up. And as a consequence, probably a million jobs were saved and the American auto industry has come roaring back and GM is now once again the number-one automaker in the world. That happened because of you.Change is the decision we made to start doing something about our oil addiction, not waiting for Congress. And so in a historic step, even without legislation, we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars, applied them to light trucks, heavy trucks for the first time. It will save consumers billions of dollars. It will help our environment. It puts us at the forefront of the electric car industry, at the forefront of the clean energy industry. That all happened because of you.Because of you, people across the country are going to still be able to serve the country they love, regardless of who they love. ""Don't ask, don't tell"" is history. That happened because of you.Change is keeping another promise that I made back in 2008. For the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. We have refocused our efforts on those who carried out 9/11. Al Qaida is being dismantled, and Usama bin Laden will never again walk the face of the Earth. And that happened because of you.So a lot's happened in 3 years. And none of this has been easy. None of this was automatic. Oftentimes we faced enormous opposition. And obviously, we're still recovering from the worst recession that we've had in our lifetimes. So we've got so much more work to do. But as I said, the good news is we're moving in the right direction.Over the last 2 years, the private sector has created about 3.7 million new jobs--3.7 million new jobs. Our manufacturers are creating jobs for the first time since the 1990s. Our economy is getting stronger. The recovery is accelerating. America is coming back, which means the last thing we can afford to do is to go back to the same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. That's what we can't afford.Now, that's what the other candidates want to do. Now, I don't know if you guys have been watching the Republican primary debates, in case you need an incentive. [Laughter] They make no secret about what they want to do. They want to go back to the days when Wall Street played by its own rules. They want to go back to the days when insurance companies could deny you coverage or jack up your premiums without reason. They want to spend trillions more on tax breaks for the wealthiest individuals, for people like me, who don't need it, weren't even asking for it, even if it means adding to the deficit, even if it means gutting our investments in education or clean energy or making it harder for seniors on Medicare. Their philosophy is simple: We are better off when everybody is left to fend for themselves, everybody makes their own rules, a few do very well at the top, and everybody else is struggling to get by. That's their core vision for America.We've got a different vision. We see America as a bigger, bolder place. I'm here to tell them they are wrong about America. Because in America, we understand, yes, we're rugged individuals, yes, we don't expect a handout, we are going to do everything we can to make it and fulfill our dreams, but we also understand we are greater together than we are on our own. We're better off when we keep that basic American promise that if you work hard, you can do well, you can succeed, that you can own that home and send that--send your kids to college and put away something for retirement.And that's the choice in this election. This is not just a political debate. This goes to who we are as a people, because we are in a make-or-break moment for the middle class and people who are trying to get in the middle class. And we can go back to an economy that is built on outsourcing and bad debt and phony financial profits; or we can build an economy that lasts, an economy that's built on American manufacturing, skills and education for American workers, and American-made energy, and most importantly, the values that have always made America great: hard work, fair play, shared responsibility. We've got to make sure that the next generation of manufacturing ideas take place right here in the United States of America. Not in factories in Europe or China, but in Detroit and Pittsburgh and Cleveland. I don't want this Nation to be known just for buying and consuming things. I want us to be selling our products and making our products, inventing products, all around the world. That's who we are. It's time for us to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs overseas. We need to reward companies that are investing and hiring right here in the United States of America.We need to make our schools the envy of the world. And that starts with the man or woman at the front of the classroom. A study recently showed a good teacher can increase the lifetime income of a classroom by $250,000. A great teacher can help a child escape poor circumstances and achieve their dreams.So I don't want to hear folks in Washington bash teachers. I don't want them defending the status quo. I want to give schools the resources they need to keep good teachers on the job. Reward the best ones, give schools flexibility to teach with creativity, stop teaching to the test.Audience member. That's right.The President. Replace teachers who aren't helping our kids. We can do those things. [Applause] We've got some teachers in the house. [Applause]When kids graduate, I want them to be able to afford to go to college. If they've been working hard, if they've gotten the grades to go to college, I don't want them to cut their dreams short because they don't think they can afford it.Right now Americans owe more in tuition debt than they do in credit card debt. And that means Congress is going to have to stop the interest rates on student loans from going up. They're scheduled to go up in July right now. Colleges and universities are going to have to do their part. I've said to them--and I've met with university and college presidents--we're going to keep on helping students afford to go to college. You've got to do your job in terms of keeping tuition down, because taxpayers can't fund this stuff forever. Higher education can't be a luxury; it's an economic necessity, an economic imperative for every family in America. And they should be able to afford it.An America built to last is one where we're supporting scientists and researchers trying to find the next breakthrough in clean energy, making sure that happens right here in the United States. You know, we've subsidized oil companies for a century. It's time to end a hundred years of subsidies for an industry that's rarely been more profitable and make sure that we're doubling down on clean energy that's never been more promising: solar power and wind power, biofuels that can break our addiction to foreign oil, create jobs here in America. It's good for our national security, it's good for our economy, it's good for your pocketbook.We need to build our infrastructure. I'm a chauvinist; I want America to have the best stuff. I want us to have the best airports and the best roads and the best ports right here in Miami that can create more jobs.So what I've said is, let's take the money we're no longer spending on war, let's use half of it to reduce the deficit, let's spend the other half to do some nation-building right here at home. Let's put folks to work.And we've got to make sure that everybody is doing their fair share. Everybody needs a fair shot, everybody has got to play by the same set of rules, everybody has got to do their fair share.And when it comes to paying for our Government and making sure the investments are there so that future generations can succeed, everybody has got to do their part. Which is why I put forward the Buffett rule: If you make more than a million dollars a year, you should not pay a lower tax rate than your secretary. That's common sense. We've said if you make $250,000 a year or less, you don't need your taxes going up right now. But folks like me, we can afford to do a little bit more.That's not class warfare. That's not envy. It has to do with simple math. If somebody like me gets a tax break that the country can't afford, then one of two things happen: Either the deficit goes up, which is irresponsible, or we're taking it out of somebody else: that student who is now suddenly having to pay a higher student loan rate or that senior who's having to pay more for Medicare or that veteran who's not getting the help they need after having served our country.That's not right. That's not who we are. Everybody in this room, we are here, successful, because somebody down the road was not just thinking about themselves, they were taking responsibility for the country as a whole. They we're thinking about their future. The American story has never been about what we just do by ourselves, it's about what we do together. We're not going to win the race for new jobs and new businesses and middle class security if we're responding to today's challenges with the same old, tired, worn-out, you're-on-your-own economics that hasn't worked.What these other guys are peddling has not worked. It didn't work in the decade before the Great Depression. It did not work in the decade before I became President. It will not work now.And this is not just a matter of economics. Look, we all have a stake in everybody's success. If we attract an outstanding teacher by giving her the pay that she deserves and giving her the training that she needs and she goes on to teach the next Steve Jobs, we all benefit. If we provide faster Internet service so that some storeowner in rural America suddenly can sell their products all around the world, or if we build a new bridge that saves a shipping company time and money, workers, consumers, all of us benefit. We all do better.This has never been a Democratic or Republican idea. This is an American idea. It was the first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, who launched a transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Sciences, the first land-grant colleges, all in the middle of the Civil War. Think about that. I'm sure there were some folks at the time who were saying: ""Why are we doing all that? I don't want to pay for that."" But that laid the groundwork for a national economy.A Republican, Teddy Roosevelt, called for a progressive income tax. Dwight Eisenhower built the Interstate Highway System. Republicans supported FDR when he gave millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, the chance to go to college on the GI bill.Everybody here has a similar story. I mean, think about Florida, think about Miami; it's a microcosm of the country, people from all over the world coming here, seeking opportunity. And the reason people came here, people--the reason people continue to come to America, is because there is a recognition that in America we will create the platform for people to succeed if they work hard. That's what is at stake in this election.And I have to tell you that that sense of common purpose that binds us together regardless of our backgrounds, that still exists today. It may not exist in Washington, but out in the country it's there. You talk to folks on Main Streets, town hall meetings, you go to a VFW hall, you go to a coffee shop--it's there. You talk to the incredible members of our Armed Forces, the men and women in uniform--it's there. You go to places of worship, that sense of a bond to something larger--it's there.So our politics may be divided--and obviously, the media loves to portray conflict--but most Americans, they understand that we're in this together, that no matter who we are, where we come from, whether you are Black or White or Latino or Asian or Native American, gay, straight, disabled or not, that we rise or fall as one Nation, as one people. And that's what's at stake right now. That's what we are fighting for. That's what we've been fighting for, for the last 3 years.And so the main message I have to all of you is, as tough as these last 3 years have been, that that vision you had that led you to get involved, you're not alone in that vision.I know the change we fought for in 2008 sometimes hasn't come as fast as we want it. There have been setbacks. There have been controversies. And with everything that's happened in Washington, sometimes, it's tempting to believe that, well, maybe that change we hoped for isn't completely possible. But remember what I said during the last campaign. People don't remember. People have a revisionist history. They remember the time from Grant Park until the inauguration. They don't remember how hard it was to get to Grant Park. [Laughter]But I told you then, I said real change, big change is hard and it's going to take time. It takes more than a single term. It takes more than a single President. Most of all, what it requires is individual citizens like you who are committed to keeping up the fight, to pushing and struggling and nudging the country so that it slowly inches closer and closer and closer to our highest ideals.The other thing I told you in 2008 was I'm not a perfect man. If you hadn't talked to Michelle, you--[laughter]--in the interest of full disclosure, I told you I'm not perfect, and I won't be a perfect President. But you know what I promised? I said I'd always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you where I stood, and I'd wake up every single day fighting as hard as I can for you. I've kept that promise. I've kept that promise.So, if you're willing to keep pushing with me, if you're willing to keep struggling with me, if you're continuing to reach out for that vision of America that we all share, I promise you change will come. If you are willing to get just as involved and engaged and motivated in 2012 as you were in 2008, I promise you we're going to finish what we started. If you stick with me, if you press with me, we will remind the world once again just why it is that America is the greatest country on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. Thank you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody. Everybody, please have a seat. Have a seat. First of all, I just want to thank Vince and the whole family for setting up this unbelievable event. This is a nice gym. [Laughter] So Vince said that he left the other side open in case I wanted to get in a dunk contest with him. But I told him I didn't bring my sneakers, so not tonight. [Laughter]But Vince has been so generous, along with his mom and the whole family, for the last couple of years. And it's a huge treat for me because I'm such a fan of his ever since he was playing for the Tar Heels. I know Reggie Love is not here, so I can praise the Tar Heels. [Laughter] But always conducting himself with such dignity and class and now doing such great work with the Mavericks. I know that Mark Cuban is pretty happy about having Vince around.I see a lot of other friends in the room. Alonzo and Tracy have been there for me every time I've come to Florida. I could not be more grateful for that. Magic and Cookie, wherever I go in California, they're there for us. Chris is helping out on our Fitness Council and allowed me to cross over on him when we played during my birthday. [Laughter] He insists that he could have stolen the ball at any time. [Laughter] But I'm going to still claim it.In addition, I want to make sure that I acknowledge, first of all, the mayor of Orlando, Buddy Dyer is here. An outstanding Senator for Florida, but also just a great Senator for the country, Bill Nelson is here. And I always have to remind people Bill was an astronaut before he was a Senator. So being a Senator is cool. Being an astronaut is cooler. [Laughter] And his lovely wife Grace, it's wonderful to see you.And the chair of the Democratic National Committee, Debbie Wasserman Schultz is here. So we love Debbie.I also understand that Commissioner Stern is here. And I just want to say that--thank you so much for settling the lockout. [Laughter] Because I don't know what I would be doing with myself if I didn't at least have some basketball games around. And obviously, we're looking forward to the All-Star Game. The game down in Miami is tight, by the way. I just--I was checking on the score as I was flying up.We've gone through 3 of the toughest years this country has gone through in my lifetime. And there are a lot of people who are still hurting all across the country, a lot of people here in Florida, a lot of people everywhere. There are still folks whose homes are underwater because the housing market collapsed. There are people who are still struggling because they can't find a job. There are folks who are just barely able to make ends meet. And obviously, those of us who are here, we've been incredibly blessed. But one of the great things about America and one of the great things about those who are in professional sports is we've all got cousins, uncles, family members who are still struggling and are a reminder that we have a lot more work to do.The good news is that the country has begun to move in the right direction. So, when I took office, we were losing 750,000 jobs a month; last month, we gained 250,000. We stabilized the financial system. We've now created 3.7 million jobs over the last 2 years. Businesses are starting to invest again. Consumer confidence is up. People are buying tickets to the games. And there's a general sense that we may have weathered the worst of the storm.That's the good news. The challenge, though, is when I ran in 2008, it wasn't just to tread water, it wasn't just to avert a great depression and then get back to where we were in 2007 and 2008, because people were already struggling then. There were too many communities where if a child was born in poverty, they didn't have any ladders to get out, where middle class families were struggling to get by, even though now you had both mom and dad working and they still didn't have enough in their paychecks to be able to make ends meet.A few people were doing very well. And what used to be the core of America's middle class felt like it was falling behind. And so as a consequence, even as we've made sure to do everything we can to dig ourselves out of this incredible hole that I inherited, even as we have strengthened the economy and focused like a laser on how do we put people back to work, we've also tried to say, how do we rebuild America in a way where everybody has got a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, everybody is playing by the same set of rules, everybody who is willing to take responsibility and work hard, they can get ahead? And that's been our challenge.And so in addition to the stuff that we've done to make sure that folks are getting back to work, we've also said nobody should go bankrupt because they get sick in this country, and we were able to pass a health care bill that is already providing 2.5 million young people insurance who didn't have it before and, by the time it's fully implemented, will give 30 million people health insurance, the kind of security that we take for granted where if our child gets sick or a family member falls ill, that they know that they're going to be able to get well without having to lose their home.That's why we focused on education, and we've said that not only do we want to improve K through 12 so that every child is getting the basics--math and science and English--but we want everybody to be able to go to college. And we took $60 billion that was going to--that was being channeled to the banks as subsidies through the student loan program, and we said let's take that money and give it directly to students so that we could expand Pell grants and we could make sure that every--young people who want to go to college can afford to do so. Because right now, actually, student loan debt is higher than credit card debt in this country. And it's a huge burden on the next generation, and we have to start relieving it.We said, we've got to have an energy policy that makes sense and that includes developing oil and gas resources in this country, but it also means focusing on clean energy. And here in Florida, we've seen enormous progress on things like solar and wind and biodiesel. But we've got to do more: making sure that our cars are more energy efficient, making sure that we're not prey to, every year right around this time, oil spiking because something is going on in the Middle East, and our whole economy is suddenly vulnerable.And we focused on making sure that our tax system is fair. What I've said consistently is, look, I don't like paying taxes any more than anybody else does, and I'm the President. Now, here's the thing about being President, you pay every dime. You don't take advantage of any loopholes--[laughter]--because everybody sees your income tax returns. So I'm probably in the top bracket in every category.But what I've said is Michelle and I have been so blessed, we can afford to do a little bit more to make sure that the next generation is able to come back up, is able to achieve their dreams the same way Michelle and I did. Because we think about our stories. I was raised by a single mom. Michelle was raised by a blue-collar worker and a secretary. My mother-in-law, even though she lives with us now, she's kept her home back in Chicago. It's now her house, but when they were growing up it was actually my mother-in-law's sister's house and Michelle's family lived on the top floor, the second floor of this bungalow. It couldn't have been more than 600 square feet where four people grew up.And yet she was able to go to a quality public school, go to Princeton, go to Harvard Law School, because somebody made an investment in her. Somebody said, you know what, we want to make sure everybody has opportunity. And that's the same way I was able to get ahead, is because somebody made an investment in me.And so what I've said is, as President, we welcome success. We want somebody like a Vince Carter to be able to build a house like this. But we want to make sure that that next generation is able to do just as well, because they're young people, just as--they might not have the same vertical as Vince--[laughter]. But they've got the same talents in something else, maybe in science, maybe in the arts, maybe in engineering, maybe they could be a doctor or a lawyer. And I don't want to pull up the ladder behind me. And I don't think anybody here does either.And that's what's at stake in this election. What's at stake in this election is whether we as a country are going to continue to look out for one another and be able to say that it doesn't matter what you look like, where you come from, what your name is, that if you're willing to work hard, you can get ahead.And that is an experience that is true for everybody in this room at some level. Somewhere in your past you had an immigrant mother or grandmother or great-grandmother or great-grandfather who came to this country with not much and was able to create a life for themselves. And in the debate that's going to be unfolding over the next several months, you seem to see a philosophy on the other side that says, basically, you know what, it's fine if a few of us do well and everybody else is struggling.And that's not how America got built. That's not what makes America strong. The reason we were the envy of the world is because we had this massive middle class and you could get rich here in America, but there was also the possibility of everybody getting ahead.I love looking at Magic's story, for example. His dad, when you talk about basketball, you learned your work ethic from your dad, right, working every day driving a truck, right? Well, you know what, that was a life of dignity and respect. You weren't a celebrity. You might not make millions of dollars, but you could raise a family and have a home and pass on to your son those same values.And that's what we're fighting for here. That's the struggle. It has to do with our values and who we are as Americans. So the good news is, as I travel around the country, most Americans agree with me.One of the things about being President is when things are going tough everybody looks to you and says, why haven't you fixed it yet? And that's okay. That's what you sign up for. As Michelle always reminds me, you volunteered for this. [Laughter]But no matter where I go around the country, whether it's in a big city or a rural community--north, south, east, west--I meet the most incredible people, and they still have confidence and optimism in America's possibilities. They get frustrated with Washington, but they still believe in what we can accomplish as a country when we work together.And that's what we're going to continue to strive for over the next several months. And that's what we're going to continue to strive for over the next 5 years with your help.So thank you very much, everybody, for being here. I appreciate it.",2008,obama
"Thank you. Wow, you are making me blush. [Laughter]It is just wonderful to be here. And I want to thank Victor and Sarah for opening up their extraordinary home. Although, I will say they have some pictures of me before I had gray hair--[laughter]--which is a little troubling. They should have put the photo down. [Laughter] But it's a testimony to how long the two of them have been friends and supporters. And those of you who know them know the passion and the extraordinary energy that they bring to issues of social justice and democratic politics.I'm grateful for all you being here. I'm going to keep my remarks at the top relatively brief so that we can have more of an exchange of ideas and I can answer questions and you guys can give me good advice.But I'll tell you, obviously, we've gone through 3 of the toughest years that America has gone through in our lifetimes. And when I think back to those early months--at a time when we were losing 800,000 jobs a month and the banking sector had completely locked up and the auto industry was on the verge of liquidation here in the United States and globally no one was sure whether the center would hold--the thing that gave me confidence was the incredible resilience and energy and hopefulness that I had seen during my travels as a Presidential candidate. And so as scary as those moments were, I had confidence that America could bounce back.Now, we're not all the way back. There is still a lot of hardship out there. There are a lot of folks who still are looking for a job, or if they're employed, are still just barely getting by. There are millions of Americans who have seen their homes decline in value and they're underwater, and they're wondering whether they're going to be able to retire as they had planned or send their kid to college.We still have an enormous amount of work to do. But the good news is that here in the United States, the trend lines are good. Last month, we saw 250,000 jobs created. We've created 3.7 million jobs over the last 2 years. We've seen the highest growth in manufacturing jobs since the 1990s. Unemployment is still high, but it's been moving in the right direction.And across the country, what you're seeing are businesses small and large saying to themselves, you know what, investing in America makes sense, because for all of our challenges, there's still no country that other folks would rather be because they understand that there is something about this place, that there's a set of values that are core to who we are, that are woven into our DNA, that allow you to make it if you try.Now the challenge is that for a lot of folks, that essential American Dream that brought a lot of our forebears here to the United States has been slipping away. And so even as we've tried to right the ship of the economy, even as we saved the auto industry, even as we stayed focused on putting people back to work, we were also looking at what are the fundamentals that ensure that everybody is going to get a fair shot, everybody is going to do their fair share, everybody is going to play by the same set of rules.And that's why, over the last 3 years, we've focused on making sure that you don't go bankrupt if you get sick and that 30 million people will have health insurance that didn't have it before and insurance companies can't deny you coverage at a time when you need it most.It's the reason we've put such an emphasis on education, not just through reform of the K-12 system, so every kid, no matter what their circumstances, can move ahead, but also, that once they graduate from high school, they can actually afford to go to college. And we've made a bigger commitment at the Federal level to education than any administration in recent history. And our basic argument has been, not only are we going to put more money in, but we're also going to reform the system and raise standards and infuse school districts with the kind of creativity and passion that's required to make sure that kids can learn.It's the reason why, on the environmental front, we've doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars so that we know that a decade from now your average vehicle will get 55 miles a gallon, which is part of the reason why we're starting to see our dependence on foreign oil decline; and having an energy policy that is not just drill, drill, drill, but is also investing in clean energy and advanced battery technologies and making sure that we're using energy more efficiently. That's going to be one of the foundations for making sure that we can succeed over the long term.So, in addition to just saving the economy, what we've been trying to do is make sure that we provide a better foundation for long-term economic growth. And we're poised to make that happen.Of course, over the last 3 years, I haven't just been able to worry about what happened here in this country, we've also had to do a little bit of worrying about what happened around the world. The first promise I made as a Presidential candidate was that I would end the war in Iraq. Last night, I had the great honor of hosting a representative sample of the incredible young men and women, and some not so young men and women, in uniform who helped allow us to stabilize Iraq. And that war is now over.We're in the process of transitioning in Afghanistan so that, increasingly, Afghans can take a lead for their own security and we can start bringing our troops home. And we've been able to do all this while focusing attention on those who actually perpetrated 9/11. And Al Qaida is weaker than it's ever been, and bin Laden is no more. Which goes to show that there's no contradiction between having a smart foreign policy, a foreign policy that is consistent with our values, but also being tough and looking out for America's national security.Now, just as there's a lot more work to do here in the United States, there's a lot more work that we have to do internationally. What's happening in the Middle East and North Africa right now is as profound, as transformative, as what happened when the Berlin Wall fell, and the jury is still out in terms of the direction that it will go. And my administration's commitment has been to say that we will continue to affirm our values, the things we believe in, that we will, where we can, defend people from brutality of their own governments, that we will stand up for human rights, we will stand up for free speech, we will stand up for women's rights. We will oppose torture. We will oppose the kind of oppressiveness that unfortunately had been too common in too many countries in that region.And one of our long-term goals in that region is to make sure that the sacrosanct commitment that we make to Israel's security is not only a matter of providing them the military capabilities they need, not only providing the sort of qualitative military edge that they need in a very tough neighborhood, but also that we are a partner with them to try to bring about a peace in the region that can be lasting. And that is a challenge.What we're seeing around that region is, is it used to be easier just to deal with one person who was an autocrat when it came to knowing who you could strike a deal with. Part of what happens as a consequence of these regimes dissolving is that we're going to have to take into account the politics and the attitudes of people in this region. And that's going to be challenging because there have been years of venom and anti-Semitism and anti-Israeli rhetoric that had been floating around for a long time.At the same time, one of the things that I'm absolutely convinced of is that for Israel's long-term security, it is going to be necessary for us--even as we draw sharp lines in terms of Israel's security--to also continue to reach out to people of good will on the other side and try to shape the kind of lasting, two-state solution that will allow Israel not only to preserve its security, but also to preserve its essence as a democratic, Jewish state.And so as I look out over the next several years, America has probably had--never had a clearer choice about where we go next, because the other side has a very different vision across the board about who we are and what's important. On the domestic front, their basic vision is if a very few people at the top are doing well and everybody else is struggling to get by, that's okay. On the foreign policy side, their view is, is that as long as we are flexing our muscles militarily, the need for engagement and diplomacy is a sign of weakness rather than strength.And so this election has huge consequences. And what I've been saying to folks as I travel around the country--a lot of supporters back in 2008--it was so much fun and so fresh to support this young guy who nobody could pronounce his name and there were those posters there and--there's a little bit of revisionist history. People remember that campaign as being flawless and so much fun. I don't remember it that way. [Laughter] I remember us screwing up all the time.And so I acknowledge, yes, I've got a little more gray hair now. And the last 3 years, despite, I think, the extraordinary work that my team has done, that we've got some dings and some nicks and some cuts from the battles we've had to fight. But I am as determined as I ever was, and I believe as deeply as I ever have, about the core decency of the American people and the importance of a Government that reflects those values.And that's what we're going to be fighting for over the next year. And I'm going to need your help. So I hope you're ready, and I hope you will be just as determined, just as fired up, just as ready to go as you were in 2008.Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, New York? Hello, New York!So let me start off by thanking Michael and James. They could not be better friends. And for them to open up their home to us just means so much.It is a special treat for me because, as some of you know, Michael has been redesigning the White House. [Laughter] And he has some strong opinions. [Laughter] And sometimes doesn't always agree with my taste. And so it is good to come to his house and critique it. [Laughter] I don't know about this whole thing right here. [Laughter] Actually, he has done a remarkable job, despite me. So I'm grateful to him.I see a lot of friends here, people who've supported me for a long time, and I just want to begin by saying thank you. I also want to announce because John Legend is here, I will not sing tonight. [Laughter]Musician John Legend. Don't steal my job. [Laughter]The President. Three years ago--a little over 3 years ago now, when I took office, America was in a place that I think some of us don't fully appreciate. We had lost 800,000 jobs the month I was sworn in. The banking system was locked up. There was worldwide panic. The stock market was about half what it is right now. And when I reflect back over the last 3 years, all the battles, all the challenges, what is remarkably encouraging is just how resilient America has proven to be.That instead of losing 800,000 jobs, last month we gained 250,000. Over the last 2 years, we've created over 3.5 million jobs just in the private sector. Manufacturing is stronger than it's been since the 1990s. We've now had 10 consecutive quarters of growth. Slowly, businesses are recovering. Slowly, families are recovering. And the auto industry is back. GM is once again the number-one automaker in the world.The trend lines are moving in the right direction. But there are still a lot of folks out there who are hurting: a lot of people who are still looking for jobs, lot of people whose homes are still underwater, a lot of small businesses that shuttered and haven't reopened.And so when I think about why I ran in 2008, it wasn't simply to rescue the country from a great depression, because at that--at the time I announced, didn't know we were going into a great depression. It wasn't to save an auto industry. It wasn't to just get back to the status quo. The reason I ran was because there were challenges that had been building up for decades that were preventing America from being the America we dream about and we believe in. An America where everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules, an America where everybody, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter what you believe, no matter who you love, you've got a chance to make it in this country.And that's why I ran. And so as much satisfaction as I take from what we've accomplished over the last 3 years, we've got so much more to do.It's part of the reason why, even as we restored the economy, even as we focused on making sure that we didn't spill into a depression, we also focused on the things that were going to matter in fulfilling that original vision: making sure that people don't go bankrupt when they get sick, making sure that we're investing in education so that young people can afford to go to college and that young people have the skills to go to college, making sure that we get rid of things like ""don't ask, don't tell"" that prevent people who love this country from serving this country just because of who they love or having to hide who they are. Making sure that we end things like torture and that we project an image around the world that is based on our values and what we care about and rejecting this notion that somehow we have to choose between our security and our values.Making sure that, in a country like America, that we are investing in not just now, but the future, and we're rebuilding our roads and our bridges, and we're investing in science and basic research. That we're thinking about how to not only reduce gas prices here and now, but also, how are we transitioning to a new economy that's not dependent on foreign oil and doubling fuel efficiency standards on cars and investing in clean energy and creating whole new industries in advanced battery manufacturing so that the cars of the future can get 100 or 200 miles a gallon or maybe at some point not have to use any oil.So what we've tried to do is deal with immediate crises, but also make sure that we're keeping our eye on that long-term vision that got me into this campaign in 2008 and got many of you to support that campaign in 2008.Now, the good news is, we've made incredible progress. The bad news is, is that we haven't had much cooperation from the other side. And I won't make this too sharply political. If you're wondering what I'm talking about, I recommend you watch the recent debates. We're thinking about just running those as advertisements--[laughter]--little snippets, without commentary. We'll just sort of--here you go, this is what they said a while back. [Laughter]But I think what you're seeing now in the Republican primary underscores what's at stake in this election. There is a fundamental choice here about who we are. Do we have a vision of America that is big and bold and generous and inclusive and is built on hope? Or do we prefer a vision for America that is narrow and cramped and says there's an ""us"" and a ""they"" and is satisfied if a few people are doing very, very well at the very top and everybody else is struggling?And that's going to apply to every issue that comes up, everything that we've done in the past, but also things that are not yet finished. For example, I believe that we've got to reform our immigration system, because it's not right if we've got 10 million people in this country who are living in the shadows, working for us, looking after our children in some cases, whose kids are U.S. citizens, playing with our kids, and somehow we can't figure out a way to give them some pathway to be a full part of this community or somehow we're afraid of attracting a talent from around the world. I mean, this is a nation of immigrants. When did we lose that sense that we welcome the ""huddled masses""? Because it enriches us, it makes us who we are.On deficits and debt, unlike Greece, even unlike England, our deficits and debts actually are entirely manageable if we make some sensible decisions. And the question is, are we going to cut education by 30 percent or Medicare by 30 percent or basically eliminate NIH funding or NSF funding or other basic research because the people in this room, we can't just pay just a little bit more in taxes? Or are we going to solve that problem in a balanced way where everybody is doing their part?And so yes, we're reforming programs like Medicare and Medicaid, but we're also saying to ourselves we can step up and do a little bit more because we figure we're going to do better and our kids are going to do better if our neighbors have a shot as well. That's what built America.On energy, right now, obviously, this happens every year--gas prices come up and somebody starts yelling, ""Drill, drill, drill."" And they want to drill in the South Lawn, and they want to drill in--[laughter]--have a drill every--have a rig every 2 miles along the California coast. And the fact of the matter is we've actually--oil production has been--is higher now than it's been in 8 years, and our dependence on foreign oil is lower than it's been in 16. We've got more rigs and more drilling in this country than all other countries combined.And we welcome that. It's good that we develop the resources that we have. But the notion that with 2 percent of the world's reserves consuming 20 percent of the world's oil, that you don't hear just a smidgen of an idea from the other side about how we might want to enhance energy efficiency, how we might want to develop new sources of energy, how we might want to restore our buildings so they're energy efficient or create more energy-efficient cars--not even a mention of it. In fact, somehow that's weak. It's un-American.On every one of these issues, we've got a really sharp, stark choice. And the fact is they're wrong. They're wrong about what's going to ensure we've got the kind of future we want.So the bottom line is that, as exciting and fun as 2008 was, at least in retrospect--[laughter]--I know I was younger then. I didn't have gray hair. It was cooler, it was trendier. There was posters and--[laughter]--you know. What's at stake this time is even more profound than what was at stake in 2008.In 2008, I was running against a general election candidate who believed in banning torture, believed in doing something about climate change, somebody who, frankly, could never get a nomination in the Republican Party this time out, would be considered too liberal, right?So the stakes are higher this time. And the question then is going to be, given that I'm a little older and it's not as trendy, are we able to summon the same kind of energy and the same kind of determination that's required to finish what we started?And I'm just here to report that I'm ready. I've got the energy, I've got the determination. I've never been more convinced about what is possible in this country if we stick with it. There are times when people say, how did you get such a fine woman as Michelle to marry you? [Laughter] And my main response is, ""Persistence."" I stick to it if I believe in something. And I fight for it. And I believe in the America that the people in this room believe in, and it's worth fighting for. So I hope you'll join me.Thanks, everybody.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, New York! Oh, it is good to be back in New York City.We've got some folks here that I want to acknowledge. First of all, the event cochairs: Deepak Chopra, thank you; Paulette Cole, thank you; Reshma Saujani, thank you; Russell Simmons, thank you.Got a couple of elected officials who are here: Congresswoman Carolyn Maloney is here, and Public Advocate Bill de Blasio is here. I want to thank all the talent who participated: Ben Folds; Ingrid Michaelson; the Roots are always in the house; and Aziz Ansari.Now, this is big because Malia is a big ""Parks and Recreation"" fan. So having Aziz here is, like, the only thing she thinks is worth me doing. [Laughter] I want to thank him for what he said earlier. I know he's backstage, but I just want to remind him, I've got more Twitter followers than you, man. [Laughter] I just want to keep him humble and hungry. [Laughter] We all need somebody who does that; fortunately, I have Michelle. [Laughter]Now, this is a incredible tapestry of what New York is all about. But I also want to thank all the Asian American and Pacific Islanders who helped get this program off the ground. It is a incredible reminder of my roots back in Hawaii and the incredible visit that we made to India just over a year ago. Although it was a little discouraging because the day after our first visit, I opened up the papers, there were two headlines: ""President Obama Visits India,"" and then there was, ""Michelle Obama Rocks India."" [Laughter] So this is kind of my life, keeps me humble.I am here today not just because I need your help, although I do, but I'm here because your country needs your help. There was a reason why so many of you worked your hearts out in 2008. And I see some friends out here who were active in that campaign. And you got involved not because you thought it was going to be easy. I mean, think about it. You supported a candidate named Barack Hussein Obama--[laughter]--for President of the United States. You did not need a poll to know that was not going to be a sure thing. [Laughter]And besides, you didn't join the campaign because of me. It was not about one person. It was because of a shared vision that we had for America. It was because of your commitments to each other. It's not a vision of America where everybody is left to fend for themselves. It's a vision of America where everybody works together and everybody who works hard has a chance to get ahead, not just those at the very top.That's the vision we share. That's the change we believed in, that no matter who you are, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter what your name is, that in this country you can make it if you try. That was the change we believed in.And we knew it wasn't going to come easy. We knew it wouldn't come quickly. But I want you to think about what we have done in just 3 years because of what you did in 2008. Think about it. Think about what change looks like. Change is the first bill I signed into law, a pretty simple law. It says women deserve an equal day's pay for an equal day's work, because we want--[applause]--because I want my daughters to have the same opportunity as someone's sons. That happened because of you.Change is the decision we made to rescue the American auto industry from collapse, even when there were some politicians who were saying, let's let Detroit go bankrupt. And with 1 million jobs on the line, we weren't going to let that happen. And today, GM is back on top as the world's number-one automaker, just reported the highest profits in 100 years. With 200,000 new jobs created in the last 2 1/2 years, the American auto industry is back. That happened because of you.Change is the decision we made to stop just waiting for Congress to do something about our addiction to oil and finally raise our fuel efficiency standards. And by the next decade, we will be driving American-made cars that get almost 55 miles to the gallon. And that will save the typical family $8,000 at the pump and reduce our dependence on foreign oil and start actually giving us some independence from these gas prices that have been going up. That's what change is. That's what you did.Change is the fight we won to stop handing $60 billion in taxpayer subsidies to banks to process student loans and give that money directly to students and families who need it so that millions of young people around the country are able to afford college just a little bit better.Change is health care reform that we passed after a century of trying, a reform that ensures that in the United States of America, nobody will go bankrupt just because they get sick. And already, 2.5 million young people have health insurance today because this law let them stay on their parent's plan. And every American can no longer be denied or dropped by their insurance company when they need care the most. That happened because of you, because of what you were willing to fight for back in 2008. Change is the fact that for the first time in history, you don't have to hide who you love to serve the country you love, because we got rid of ""don't ask, don't tell."" And change is keeping another promise I made in 2008: For the first time in 9 years there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. We put that war to an end, and we refocused our efforts on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11. And thanks to the incredible men and women in uniform, Al Qaida is weaker than it has ever been and Usama bin Laden will never again walk the face of this Earth.We've restored respect for America around the world, made clear that America will abide by those core values that made us a great country. We ended torture. We promoted human rights. We made it clear that America is a Pacific power. We demonstrated that if countries like Burma travel down the road of democratic reform, they will find a new relationship with the United States. And we are leading again by the power of our moral example. That's what change is.Audience member. No more war!The President. None of this--nobody has announced a war, young lady. But we appreciate your sentiment. You're jumping the gun a little bit there.None of this change has been easy. And we've got a lot more work to do. There are still too many Americans out there looking for work. There are too many families out there who are having a tough time paying their bills or making their mortgage or their house is underwater. They're still recovering from the worst economic storm in our lifetimes, in generations.But over the last 2 years, businesses have added about 3.7 million new jobs. Our manufacturing sector is creating jobs again for the very first time since the 1990s. Our economy is getting stronger. The recovery is accelerating. America is coming back.And the last thing we can afford to do right now is to go back to the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. But you know, that is exactly what the other folks for this office--who are running for this office want to do.I don't know if you've been paying attention--[laughter]--but they make no secret about their agenda. They want to go back to the days when Wall Street played by its own rules. They want to go back to the days when insurance companies could deny coverage or jack up your premiums without a reason. They want to spend a trillion dollars more on tax breaks for the wealthiest individuals, even if it means adding to our deficit or gutting education or gutting our investment in clean energy or making it tougher for seniors who are on Medicare. And their philosophy is simple: We are better off when everybody is left to fend for themselves, the most powerful can play by their own rules.We're at a crossroads here. We've got as stark a choice as we've seen in a very long time. And their vision of America is fundamentally wrong, because in the United States of America we are greater together than we are on our own. We're better off--[applause]--we are better off when we keep to that basic American promise that if you work hard, you can do well enough to raise a family and own a home, send your kids to college and let them dream bigger than you ever imagined. Maybe you can retire with some dignity and respect and put a little bit away after a lifetime of labor. If you have a good idea to start a business, you can go out there and start one. If you want to serve, then there's a place for you teaching, helping kids who are having a tough time. That's the choice in this election.This is not just another political debate. What's at stake is the defining issue of our time, because middle class Americans, but also those striving to get in the middle class, those of us who know we would not be here had it not been for the opportunities given our parents and our grandparents and our great-grandparents, some of us immigrants, some of us who are here because of that basic American promise. That's what we're fighting for. They are in a make-or-break moment.We can go back to an economy that's built on outsourcing and phony debt and phony financial profits, or we can fight for an economy that works for everybody, an economy that's built to last, that's built on American manufacturing and American energy and education and skills for our workers and the values that made us great: hard work and fair play and shared responsibility. That's the vision of America that I believe in. That's the vision of America you believe in. That's what's at stake in this election.I want an America where we are still attracting the best and the brightest from around the world. I want an America where the next generation of manufacturing is taking root here in the factories of Detroit and Pittsburgh and Cleveland. I don't want this Nation to just be known for how much we buy and consume. I want us to be inventing products and building products and selling products all around the world.And we've got to have a Tax Code that incentivizes people to invest here, not just rewarding companies that are sending jobs overseas. We want capital and talent here, creating here in America.We need to make our schools the envy of the world. And that starts with the man or woman at the front of the classroom. Because a good teacher--a recent study showed a good teacher can increase the lifetime earnings of just one class by over $250,000. So I don't want to hear folks in Washington bashing teachers; I don't want them defending the status quo. Let's give schools the resources they need to keep good teachers on the job and reward the best teachers. Let's grant schools flexibility to teach with creativity and passion and stop teaching to the test, even as--and demanding accountability and replacing teachers who aren't helping kids learn, but making sure that teachers who love to teach, that they're supported.And when kids graduate, the most daunting challenge is, how do they afford college. Right now we've got more tuition debt than credit card debt in America. Now there's some immediate things we need to do. Congress needs to stop the interest rates on student loans from doubling in July. That's coming up. Colleges and universities have to do their part to be more affordable. If they can't stop tuition from going up, the funding they get from taxpayers should go down. Because higher education can't be a luxury, it's an economic imperative that every American family should be able to afford.We've got to invest in our people. That's what will determine who can compete in the 21st century. And other countries are--they understand this. They're catching up. They're making the investments. Why aren't we? Why are we seeing teachers laid off all across the country? Why are we seeing it harder for young people to get a college education? Our priorities have gotten a little skewed.An economy built to last is one where we're supporting scientists and researchers trying to make sure that the next breakthrough in clean energy happens right here in the United States of America. We've subsidized oil companies for over a hundred years. It's time to end those taxpayer giveaways to an oil industry that's rarely been more profitable, and let's double that on clean energy that has never been more promising: solar, wind, and biofuels.We need to rebuild America. I'm a chauvinist when it comes to--I want America to have the best stuff. I want us to have the best roads and the best airports and the fastest railroads and Internet access. It's time to take the money that we're no longer spending at war, use half of it to pay down the debt, use the other half for some nation-building here at home. Let's put people back to work rebuilding America.And in order to create this economy built to last, we've got to make sure that we've got a tax system that reflects everybody doing their fair share. That's why I've said we should follow the Buffett rule: If you make more than a million dollars a year, you should not pay a lower tax rate than your secretary. Now, if you make less than $250,000 a year, which is 98 percent of Americans, your taxes shouldn't go up. You're already challenged right now.When I lay this out, I try to remind folks this is not class warfare. This isn't about envy. This is about basic math. Because if somebody like me gets a tax break I don't need and that the country cannot afford, then one of two things has to happen. Either that's going to add to the deficit; it's a tax cut that's not paid for, and we've just gone through a decade of that. Or alternatively, we're going to reduce the deficit on the backs of folks who can't afford it: the student who has to pay more for their student loans or the senior who suddenly has to pay more for their Medicare or a family that's trying to get by. That's not fair. It's not right. It's not who we are.You hear a lot about values during election season. Politicians love to talk about values. And I think back, when I hear some of this talk, about the values my mother, my grandparents taught me when I was growing up. Hard work, that's a value. Looking out for one another, compassion, that's a value. The idea that we're all in this together and that we're--that we trust and care for one another, that I am my brother's keeper, I am my sister's keeper, that's a value.Each of us is here because somewhere, somebody took responsibility not just for themselves, but also for the future, for their family, for their community, for their Nation. The American story has never been about what we do alone. It's what we do together. And we won't win the race for new jobs and businesses and security for middle class families with this same old ""you're on your own"" economics that the other side is peddling. It doesn't work.It never worked. It didn't work when we tried it back in the decade before the Great Depression. It didn't work when we tried it in the last decade. And it won't work now. It will not work.And what everybody here understands instinctively is if we attract an outstanding teacher to the profession by giving her the pay that she deserves, and that teacher goes on to educate the next Steve Jobs, we all benefit. If we provide faster Internet to rural America so a storeowner could suddenly sell his goods around the world or the next Russell Simmons, entrepreneur, can start promoting some unbelievable music, even though you don't have a lot of capital, that benefits all of us.If we build a new bridge that saves shipping companies time and money or make airports work a little bit better so everybody saves a couple hours when you have to fly somewhere, we all do better: businesses, workers, customers--America.And this has never been a Democratic or a Republican idea. The first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, launched the transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Sciences, the first land-grant colleges in the middle of a Civil War, because he understood those investments will pay dividends for decades to come. Teddy Roosevelt, Republican, called for a progressive income tax because he understood that we don't want a system in which barriers are created for the majority of people to be able to succeed.Dwight Eisenhower, Republican, built the Interstate Highway System, stitching us together as one Nation. Republicans in Congress supported FDR when he gave millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, a chance to go to college on the GI bill.This is not a left-right idea. This is an American idea. And that same sense of common purpose, it still exists. Not always in Washington, but out in America, it's there. You go to a Main Street, you go to a town hall, you go to a VFW hall, you go to a diner, you go to a small business, you talk to the members of our Armed Forces, you go to a synagogue or a mosque or a church, a temple; our politics may be divided, but Americans, they know we have a stake in each other. They know no matter who you are, where you come from, we rise or fall as one Nation, as one people. And that's what's at stake right now. That's what this election is about.So let me say this, New York, I know it's been a tough few years for America. We've taken some shots. The change we fought for in 2008 hasn't always happened as fast as we would have liked. After all that's happened in Washington, sometimes you look and you just see the mess--[laughter]--and it's tempting, I think, to sometimes say, you know what, maybe change isn't possible. Maybe that spirit that we had, maybe we were naive. I know it's tempting to believe that. But remember what I always used to say during the last campaign, including that night at Grant Park. I said, real change, big change, is always hard. It's always hard. The civil rights movement was hard. Winning the vote for women was hard. Making sure that workers had some basic protections was hard. Around the world, Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, what they did was hard. It takes time. It takes more than a single term. It takes more than a single President. It takes more than a single individual. What it takes is ordinary citizens who keep believing, who are committed to fighting and pushing and inching this country closer and closer to our highest ideals.And I said in 2008 that I am not a perfect man and I will not be a perfect President. But I promised you--[laughter]--I promised you back then that I would always tell you what I believed, I would always tell you where I stood, and that I would wake up every single day thinking about you and fight for you as hard as I could and do everything possible to make sure that this country that has given me and Michelle and our kids so much, that that country is there for everybody. And you know what, I have kept that promise.So, if you're willing to work with me and push through the obstacles and push through the setbacks and get back up when we get knocked down, and if you're willing to hold that vision that we have for America in your hearts, then I promise you change will come. And if you're willing to work as hard as you did in the last election in this election, then we will finish what we started and remind the world just why it is that America is the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you, everybody. God bless the United States of America. Thank you.",2008,obama
"[The President's remarks were joined in progress.]----first of all, your outstanding Congresswoman of this district, Carolyn Maloney, is here, and we want to give her a big round of applause. And my understanding is we also have the chairman of our convention effort in Charlotte, North Carolina, Jim Rogers. Where's Jim? Where is he? Jim Rogers, right here. Thank you, Jim. Here--is working hard to make sure that is a good event, and we're going to make sure that North Carolina is blue again.So I'm not going to be long at the top. I'm just going to make a few brief remarks, and then what I want to do is save as much time as possible for us to have a conversation and to take questions.Four years ago, we were losing 800,000 jobs a month; last month, we gained 250,000 jobs. Three years ago, the banking system had frozen up completely; today, credit is flowing again. Three years ago, the auto industry was on the verge of liquidation; today, GM not only is the number-one automaker in the world again, but also saw the highest profits in its entire history. Over the last 2 years, we've created 3.7 million jobs in the private sector. Manufacturing is the strongest it's been since the 1990s.None of this argues that we're out of the woods. Many of you are in business, and you know better than I do that there are a lot of folks out there who are still having a tough time. There are a lot of small businesses that still have trouble getting credit. The unemployment rate remains too high. We still have enormous challenges to make sure that we are the most competitive, most productive economy in the world in the 21st century. But the trend lines are good. The economy is stronger, we are more productive, and we are poised to be able to take advantage of a moment where all the things that we're good at--innovation, dynamism, entrepreneurship--all those things are going to be at a greater premium than ever before.And the question then becomes, do we continue down the path that allows us to compete and create good jobs with good wages and ensures that the essence of the American Dream, which is everybody gets a fair shot, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like; if you work hard and you've got a good idea, you're able to succeed; that everybody does their fair share so that, in addition to this incredible individualism and enterprise that we rightly are proud of, we also are looking out for one another; and everybody is playing by the same set of rules, that the notion of fair play exists in all sectors of our economy--the question is, is that going to be the vision that guides us over the next 10, 20, 50 years? Or are we going to pursue a vision that says it's okay for a few of us to do really well while the rest of America is struggling?And this election is going to give us a starker choice than we have had in my lifetime. Now, if you agree with me that it's good for all of us to ensure everybody has a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, and fair play reigns, then that has to translate into some concrete policy. It means that we continue to make investments in education and we follow the path that we've been following over the last 3 years, which is, yes, we put more money into education, but we also demand more reform.It means we continue to make investments in American-made energy. But that doesn't just include oil production and gas production, as much as we're promoting that. It also includes us preparing for the future by investing in clean energy.It means we're investing in science and technology, recognizing that that's how we got here, was we invented more stuff and operationalized it and commercialized it better than anybody else in the world. And the Federal Government historically has had a role in that.It means we rebuild our infrastructure so that we can compete and move goods and services around the world better than anybody else can.And it means that even as we are getting our fiscal house in order, that we're doing so in a way that doesn't just put the burden on the senior citizen on Medicare or the student who is trying to finance their way through college, but those of us that have been incredibly blessed by this society, that we're doing our part as well.Now, the proposals that I've put forward in terms of balancing our budget, making our Government more efficient, but making sure that it's still creating ladders of opportunity, making sure that we're still investing in those things that help us succeed economically, that made us an engine of economic growth and created this incredible middle class that we have--all those things that we've done are ideas that traditionally received Democratic and Republican support.It's only in this environment that we've seen the other party suddenly say that that's socialism, that that somehow is un-American. That somehow the critical role that Government has played as a partner with the marketplace to create opportunity for everybody, that somehow there's something wrong with that. I reject that vision, and I think the American people do too.Now, they've gone 3 tough years, and so this is going to be a close election. Nobody is under any illusion that this isn't going to be a tight race for us. But as I travel around the country and I talk to folks, including people who don't support me, when you break down the individual items that are being debated right now--how do we balance this budget, what our tax policy should be, should we be investing in education, should we make sure that science and basic research continue to be paramount in our economy, do we have an obligation to make sure that our seniors can retire with dignity and respect--we win that argument every time.And when it comes to foreign policy, I'm actually finding it very interesting. The other side traditionally seems to feel that Democrats are somehow weak on defense, and they've had a little trouble making that argument this year. Because I think that what we've shown is there's no contradiction between being tough and strong and protecting the American people, but also abiding by those values that make America great and believing in diplomacy and believing in engagement and believing that it's not a sign of weakness when we try to resolve issues peacefully, even as we're prepared, when we need to for our own security, to act militarily.So let me just close by saying this. So many people in this room were active in 2008. So many of you have had to defend me from your coworkers over the last 3 years. [Laughter] And it's true that over the last 3 years I'm a little grayer than I was. Being an Obama supporter is not as trendy as it was. [Laughter] Those old ""Hope"" posters that we had, they're a little dog eared. [Laughter] But I am more determined and more confident than I have ever been that if we keep at it, that America is poised to be stronger, more unified, more competitive, bolder, more generous than we ever have been before.And you will see me working harder and making those arguments as passionately as anything that I did in 2008. And if you guys are with me, then I'm pretty confident not only are we going to win, but more importantly, America is going to be in good stead for years to come.Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Texas! Oh, it is good to be back in Houston. The weather wasn't quite cooperating. [Laughter] But we got here. And so did you.We've got some wonderful folks here, but first of all, can everybody please give Debra Jones a big round of applause for the wonderful introduction.We have in the house your outstanding mayor, Annise Parker. We've got Congressman Gene Green. We've got Congressman Al Green. He's the one who taught me how to sing. [Laughter] We've got Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee. And we have all of you.It is good to be in this facility. As a White Sox fan, I have a fond memories----Audience members. Boo!The President. ----of this facility. [Laughter] I want to thank Jim Crane for helping to make it available. And I want to thank all of you for being part of this thing here today.Audience member. I love you!The President. I love you back.So I'm here today not just because I need your help. I'm here because the country needs your help. Now, there was a reason why so many of you worked your hearts out back in 2008. It wasn't because you thought it was going to be easy. After all, you decided to support a candidate named Barack Obama. You knew that wasn't going to be a sure thing. [Laughter]You didn't join the campaign just because of me. You joined it because of your commitment to each other. You joined it because you had a common vision for America. Not a vision where everybody is left to fend for themselves; it was a vision where everyone who works hard has a chance to get ahead, not just those at the very top, but everybody.That's the vision that we shared. That's the change that we believed in. And we knew it wouldn't come easy. We knew it wouldn't come quickly. We knew problems had been building up for decades. But I tell you what, in just 3 years, because of what you did, we've begun to see what change looks like.Change is the first bill I signed into law that says women deserve an equal day's pay for an equal day's work. Our daughters should be treated just the same and have the same opportunities as our sons.Change is the decision that we made that Debra alluded to, to rescue the American auto industry, save it from collapse, even when some politicians were saying let's let Detroit go bankrupt. With 1 million jobs on the line, I wasn't going to let that happen. And today, GM is back as the number-one automaker in the world, reporting the highest profits in its history. And with 200,000 new jobs created in the last 2 1/2 years, the American auto industry is back. That's what change is. That happened because of you.Change is the decision that we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our oil addiction and finally raise our fuel efficiency standards. And by the next decade, we will be driving American-made cars that are getting 55 miles a gallon, and that saves American families about $8,000 at the pump. That's what change is. That happened because of you.Change is the fight we won to stop handing over $60 billion in taxpayer subsidies to banks in the student loan program, give that money directly to students. And as a consequence, millions of young people all across the country are getting help that they didn't have before. That happened because of your change.Audience members. TSU loves you!The President. We've got TSU in the house. Change is the fact that for the first time in history, you don't have to hide who you love in order to serve the country you love. ""Don't ask, don't tell"" is over.And yes, change is health care reform that we passed after a century of trying. This is reform that makes sure that nobody in this country goes bankrupt just because they get sick. And already 2 1/2 million young people have health insurance today that did not have it before because this law lets them stay on their parent's plan. Because of this law, preventive care is now covered. And yes, that includes preventive care for women: checkups, mammograms, birth control.We fought for this because the top doctors, the medical experts in the country said this kind of preventive care saves women's lives. We fought for it because we know it saves money. It's a lot cheaper to prevent an illness than to treat one. So, when you see politicians who are trying to take us back to the days when this care was more expensive and harder to get for women--and I know you're seeing some of that here in Texas--you just remember, we can't let them get away with it. We fought for this change. We're going to protect this change. It's the right thing to do.And change is keeping another promise I made in 2008. For the first time in 9 years, we do not have any Americans who are fighting in Iraq. We refocused our efforts on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11. And thanks to our brave men and women in uniform--and there are a lot, a lot of servicemembers and a lot of veterans here in the great State of Texas--Al Qaida is weaker than it's ever been and Usama bin Laden will never again walk the face of this Earth.None of this has been easy. We've got a lot more work to do. There's still too many Americans out there looking for work, still too many families struggling to pay the bills or make the mortgage. We're still recovering from the worst economic crisis of our generation or many generations. But over the past 2 years, businesses have added almost 4 million new jobs. Our manufacturers are creating jobs for the first time since the 1990s. Our economy steadily has been getting stronger. The recovery is accelerating. America is coming back. And the last thing we can afford to do is go back to the same policies that got us into this mess in the first place.Of course, that's exactly what the other folks running for this office want us to do. They think you all have amnesia. [Laughter] They think you've forgotten how we got into this mess. They want to go back to the days when Wall Street played by its own rules. They want to go back to the days when insurance companies could deny you coverage or jack up your premiums without any reason. They want to go back to spending trillions of dollars more on tax breaks for the wealthiest individuals--folks like me--even if it means adding to the deficit or gutting education or gutting investments in clean energy or gutting Medicare. They're philosophy is simple: We're better off when everybody is left to fend for themselves.Let me tell you something: They are wrong. In the United States of America, we're always greater together than we are on our own. We're better off when we keep that basic American promise where if you work hard, you can do well enough to raise a family or own a home, start your own business, send your kids to college, put a little away for retirement, maybe someday own the Astros. That's the choice we face in this election.Look, we want everybody to succeed. We want everybody to do well--not just a few, but everybody to have that chance. That's what America's about. No matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, if you are willing to work hard, if you are willing to roll up your sleeves, you can make it. That's the American way.And this is not just another political debate; this is the defining issue of our times. This is a make-or-break moment for middle class families and everybody who's trying to get into the middle class. I mean, we can go back to an economy that's built on outsourcing and bad debt and phony financial profits, or we can fight for an economy that's built to last.And that's what we've been talking about for the last 3 years: an economy built on American manufacturing and American energy and the skills that American workers need, the education that our kids deserve, and the values that always made this country great: hard work and fair play and shared responsibility, everybody, from top to bottom, everybody pitching in.And you know what? That's actually what everybody wants to do. When you hear some of these political debates--poor people, they want to work hard, they want to find a job. Wealthy people, they believe in this country, they want to give back. But we've gotten into this pattern where our politics divides us and pushes us apart.We need to make sure that the next generation of manufacturing takes root not in Asia, not in Europe, but right here, in Detroit and Pittsburgh and Cleveland and Houston. We don't want to be a nation--nobody should want us to be a nation known for just buying and consuming things. We want to build things, make things, invent things, sell things all around the world, which is why we need to stop giving tax breaks to businesses that ship jobs overseas. Let's reward companies that are creating jobs right here in the United States of America.We've got to make our schools the envy of the world, and that starts with the men and women in front of the classroom. You know, an interesting statistic: A great teacher can increase the lifetime incomes of a classroom by over $250,000--just one teacher. So I don't want folks bashing teachers. I don't want folks defending the status quo. I want us to give the schools the resources they need to recruit and keep good teachers on the job, to reward the best ones.Let's grant schools the flexibility to teach with creativity and passion, stop teaching to the test, replace teachers--train our teachers, and those who aren't helping our kids learn, we're going to have to replace.And when kids do graduate, the most daunting challenge is affording the cost of college. Right now Americans owe more in tuition debt than credit card debt. So this Congress--and I know these Members of Congress agree with me here--we've got to stop the interest rates on student loans from doubling in July. And colleges and universities have to do their part. If they can't stop tuition from going up, then there should be some penalties, because taxpayers are willing to help young people, but ultimately, colleges and universities have got to do their part too. Higher education can't be a luxury; it's an economic imperative that every family in America should be able to afford.An economy that's built to last is one that supports our scientists and our researchers that are trying to make the next breakthrough, invent the next product, discover the next source of clean energy right here in the United States of America.You know, the--Houston--this is an oil town. And that's good. We need oil. And we've got a high production of oil right now. When you hear folks saying, oh, Obama's not supporting oil production--we've got the highest production we've had in 8 years. We're opening up millions of acres to new production, got more rigs than the entire world combined right here in the United States.But we don't need to subsidize oil companies when they're doing this well. So what I've said is, rather than continue a hundred years of taxpayer subsidies to an industry that's very, very profitable, let's double down on our investments in clean energy that's never been more promising. That will create jobs in Texas--solar power and wind power, biofuels. We want an all-of-the-above strategy. Yes, oil. Yes, gas. Yes, solar. Yes, wind.Audience member. Yes, we can.The President. Yes, we can. We can do it.We've got to rebuild our infrastructure. I--you know, I'm biased; I want America to have the best stuff. I want us to have the best roads, the best airports, the fastest railroads, the quickest Internet access. So I've said, let's take the money that we're no longer spending in Iraq, let's use half of it to pay down our debt. Let's use the rest to do some nation-building right here in Houston, right here in Texas, right here in the United States of America.And let's make sure our tax system has everybody doing their fair share. I've called for something called the Buffett rule: If you make more than a million dollars a year, you should not pay a lower tax rate than your secretary. And you know what, most folks who've done well, they agree. They understand. They understand that folks making $250,000 a year or less--98 percent of American families--can't see their taxes going up.Audience member. That's right.The President. You agree with that. [Laughter] But folks like me, we can afford to do a little bit more if it means protecting our kids and making sure that we're investing in the future. This isn't class warfare. This isn't about envy. This is just basic math. Because if somebody like me gets a tax break that I don't need, that I wasn't asking for, and that the country can't afford, then one of two things happens: Either it adds to our deficit, or it's going to take something away from somebody else. From a student, suddenly their college tuition gets more expensive; or a senior citizen who suddenly is paying higher on their prescription drugs; or a veteran who desperately needs help to recover from sacrificing on our behalf.That's not right.Audience member. It ain't right!The President. Not only is it not right, it ain't right. [Laughter] That's not who we are as Americans.You hear a lot of politicians during election years, they talk about values. Well, look, I agree, we should be talking about what are our values as Americans. Hard work, that's a value. Looking out for one another, that's a value. The idea that we're all in this together, as Debra said, that I am my brother's keeper, I am my sister's keeper, that's a value.Everybody here, whatever success we have, it's because someone, somewhere, took responsibility not only for themselves, but also for their kids, for their neighborhood, for their church, for their community, for our country's future. Our American story has never been just about what we can do on our own. It's about what we can do together. We're not going to be able to compete around the world, win the race for new jobs and businesses and creating--recreating middle class security with the same old you-are-on-your-own economics. It doesn't work. It didn't work when it was tried right before the Great Depression. It didn't work when we tried it in the last decade. Why would we think it would work now? That's another example of amnesia some of these folks have. [Laughter]We tried what they're peddling; it did not work. You understand that. Look, let me give you just some examples. You know that if we attract an outstanding teacher to the profession by giving her the pay and respect and support that she deserves, and that teacher then goes on and educates the next Steve Jobs, we all benefit. If we provide faster Internet to some rural town in Texas, so suddenly that storeowner in that little town can start selling his goods all around the country and all around the world, we benefit. The economy benefits, America benefits. If we build a new bridge that saves a shipping company time and money, workers, customers, that business, everybody, we all do better.This isn't a Democratic idea or a Republican idea. It was a Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, who launched the transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Sciences, and the first land-grant colleges in the middle of a civil war. It was a Republican, Teddy Roosevelt, who called for a progressive income tax. Dwight Eisenhower built the Interstate Highway System. Republicans helped FDR pass the law that gave millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, the chance to go to college on the GI bill.This should not be a partisan idea. And you know what, that same spirit of common purpose that lies at the heart of America, it's still there. It might not be there in Washington, but out in America, it's there. It's there where you talk to people in Main Streets or town halls or VFW halls. It's there when you talk to the members of our Armed Forces. If you go into a church or a synagogue or a mosque, you'll find out people are supporting each other and believe in the notion of everyone pulling together.Our politics may be divided, but most Americans understand that we're in this together. No matter who we are or what we look like, where we come from, what our names are, we rise and fall as one Nation and as one people. And that's what's at stake right now. That's what this election is all about.I know it's been a tough few years. I know the change that we fought for hasn't always come as fast we'd like. And after all that's happened in Washington, sometimes it may be tempting to start feeling cynical again and think maybe change isn't possible. But I want you to remember what we used to say during the last campaign. We didn't promise easy. I--you never heard me say change was easy. Real change--big change--is hard. It takes time. It takes more than a single year, a single term. It will take more than a single President.What it really requires is ordinary citizens, all across the country, committed to fighting and pushing and inching this country, step by step, closer to our common ideals, our highest ideals.You know what else I said in 2008? I said I'm not a perfect man. I didn't promise I'd be a perfect President. But what I promised you was that I would always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you where I stood, and I would wake up every single day fighting as hard as I could, fighting as hard as I know how, for you. And I've kept that promise. I have kept that promise, Texas.So, if you're willing to keep working with me and marching with me and standing with me, pushing through the obstacles to reach for that vision that you hold in your hearts, change will come. If you're willing to work as hard in this election as you did in last election, change will come. We'll finish what we started in 2008.God bless you. God bless the United States of America. Thank you.",2008,obama
"Well, it is wonderful to see all of you here today. I just want to, first of all, obviously thank Tony and Dina. They have been great friends for a very long time. In fact, the first time I met Tony, I was still in law school, and Tony was an alum, and he came back to law school, and he was a big cheese and important and--but he was willing to shake my hand and--[laughter]--couldn't really pronounce my name--[laughter]. But he was very nice to me, and I will never forget that. And we've been great friends ever since. So I'm so grateful to him.I want to acknowledge somebody who has also been a good friend for a long time and did a lot of work for this, Rodney Ellis--outstanding State senator. State Representative Garnet Coleman is in the house.And so many of you--as we were looking around the room, folks here--there are folks who--first Houston event, second Houston event--[laughter]. I mean, I've just got--they're dispersed throughout the crowd. But we just have a lot of good friends here.And I also want to acknowledge, by the way, Mayor White is here, and the--just want to thank him for the great work that he has done.I want to spend most of my time just interacting and answering questions. So I'm going to keep my remarks at the top relatively brief.We've obviously gone through 3 of the toughest years that any of us can recall: worst financial crisis, worst economic crisis in our lifetimes. And yet, 3 years later, we can look then and look now and say to ourselves that we have made progress. When I took office, we were losing 800,000 jobs a month. We found out last month that we created another 233,000 jobs, which gets us close to 4 million jobs created over the last 2 years, the strongest manufacturing growth since the 1990s.We're obviously still in the midst of a lot of struggles for a lot of people, but the trend lines are good. And the reason is because so many of you believed in the same vision that I believe in: an America where if you work hard, if you take responsibility, if you're willing to apply yourself, you can make it if you try here, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter what your name. And that was the premise of our campaign back in 2008. Part of what I think allowed us to be successful against some very long odds was, at its core, our campaign reaffirmed our basic faith and confidence and optimism in America.And it's that optimism that has carried me through these difficult 3 years, because everywhere I go I meet people who, despite hardship, despite losing a job, despite a plant closing in town, people are resilient, and they come back, and they're not willing to quit or say no. And that's what's really carried me through. And because of that enormous decency at the core of the American people, I'm confident that we're going to be able to keep moving over the next year, the next 5 years, the next 10 years, the next 20 years.But our ability to bounce back and then thrive is also going to depend on some choices that we make right now. And as important as 2008 was, I think this election is even more important. Because very rarely are you going to see such a stark choice about how one party sees the country and where we need to go and how the other party sees the country and where we need to go.I strongly believe that we're going to have to invest in American manufacturing. I was at a plant today in Virginia where they make the jet engines for Boeing. And we're starting to set up pilot programs around the country where we're connecting universities with manufacturers, community colleges with businesses, bringing scientists and engineers together, to make sure that we're innovating and making things and building things right here in America. I don't want a country where we're just consuming. I want a country where we're building and we're selling stuff.And that requires the private sector taking the lead, but it also requires investments in research and science and education, making sure we've got the engineers that are needed for us to compete. And that's something that historically has been an important role of Government. But we've got a party that somehow believes that those investments are unimportant, despite the fact that's what made us into an economic superpower.I believe that we've got to make sure that our K-12 education system works. And that's not just a function of money, it's a function of reform. And we've initiated bolder reforms on education than at any time in the last 20, 30 years. Forty-six States have revamped their education system so that we're holding schools more accountable, we're asking them to make sure that they're thinking about students first, but we're also giving them the resources to train their teachers and succeed and to teach more creatively, not just teach to the test. That involves us making an investment. That involves us being involved.Same thing when our kids get to college. There's actually more tuition debt now than there is credit card debt. And one of the things we're very proud of over the last 3 years is we revamped our student loan programs to free up $60 billion to make college more accessible to young people all across the country.The other--you don't hear much in the debates of the other party right now about education. In fact, I don't think it's been mentioned. And yet nothing is going to be more significant in whether or not we can compete in the 21st century. There's a stark choice there.When it comes to energy--Texas is an energy State. And over the last several weeks, I've had to remind people we actually have higher production now in oil than at any time in the last 8 years. We are starting to tap into the natural gas resources of this country that could provide energy for 100 years. But we only have 3 percent of the world's oil reserves, which means that we're going to have to focus on efficiency. And when we double fuel efficiency standards on cars, that's not bad for the oil industry, but it does make sure that American businesses and American families are going to be able to keep on going even as demand goes up in China and India and Brazil and other places.And we've got to invest in clean energy, solar and wind and biodiesel. It's not an either-or, it's a all-of-the-above strategy in order for us to free ourselves from dependence of the--on foreign oil and the winds of what happens in the Middle East. That's a choice.We've got a choice that we're going to have to make about the deficit and how we solve that problem and bring down our debt. And the fact of the matter is, is that we've already made more discretionary cuts than had been proposed by the Bowles-Simpson commission. We have cut programs that aren't working to make sure that we're funding those that do. We're revamping and reforming Government so it's more efficient. I'm prepared to make some significant reforms on entitlements to ensure that they're there for future generations.But even after we've done all that, it's not going to work unless those of us in this room also agree that we've got to make sure that we're doing our fair share. Because the tax rate right now is the lowest it's been in 50 years, and we disproportionately benefit from that. So the idea of shared responsibility, which has been rejected by the other side, you know what, I think that's central to who we are. And if we're going to get a handle on this thing, it's just basic math. We can't just do one side of the equation, we've got to deal with both sides of the equation, both revenues and spending.So, whether it's health care, whether it's the role of women, whether it's how serious we're going to take immigration reform and making sure we're a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants, whether it's foreign policy and whether we have--whether we continue the course that we've set over the last 3 years, which says, we're going to go after those who would do us harm, but we also understand that our security doesn't just depend on our military, it depends on the respect we're held in the world and how we reach out diplomatically and whether we're helping other countries feed themselves and prosper--on each of these issues there is a stark choice.And here's the good news: I am absolutely confident that our vision about where America needs to go is shared by the American people. Not 100 percent--this is a big, diverse, complicated country, and the democratic debate is always messy. But when you travel to town halls or VFW halls or churches or synagogues, or wherever you go around the country, what you'll find is a common belief that everybody should get a fair shot, everybody should do their fair share, everybody should play by the same set of rules, and that we're stronger together than we are when we're apart. And those basic principles, I think, are consistent with what we fought for in 2008. And they are the foundation for my campaign in 2012. And so if you're with me in pursuing that vision, we've gotten a lot of stuff done over these last 3 1/2 years, but I'd say I've got about 5 more years to finish the job.So all right. Thank you, everybody.",2008,obama
"Dear Harry: Many thanks for your good letter expressing as it does your sincere interest in a most vital problem confronting our country. As you know, I fully share your view as to the splendid accomplishments of the Congress in translating so much of my legislative program into reality during the session recently concluded. Several of these enactments required of the Congress the setting of new directions and a fresh pace. That is always a time-consuming and often exacting process. With respect to the foreign economic policy aspects of the program, it was unavoidable that they reached the Congress well along in the session. Time was not available to consider them adequately. I want to emphasize, however, that my Message of March 30, 1954 to the Congress on this subject remains firmly the Administration position. It is my present intention to give high priority to progress in this whole field in planning for next year's legislative program. The events of every day bear in heavily upon us the imperative necessity of building stronger economic relations between ourselves and the free world. This is true, first because the growth of our own economy and the attainment of rising standards of living for our people can materialize only in step with economic growth and improvement in the economies of the free world linked to ours. It is more emphatically true because it is in our enlightened self-interest to have economically strong friends throughout the world. The prudent widening and deepening of the channels of trade and investment by us will not only produce good results in themselves but will encourage similar action by our friends abroad. That is the route to better markets and better feeling. I note what you say on the watch tariff decision. That case, as with the more recent one on lead and zinc, was decided solely on its merits under the law in the light of the United States Tariff Commission's report and with the advice of interested Departments and Agencies of the Executive Branch. I welcome your support and the support of the many who like you believe that the proposals of my Message of last March are still in the best interest of our people. Sincerely, DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER",2008,obama
"BECAUSE OF great progress in the field of atomic energy during the past eight years, I recommended early this year that the Congress modernize the Atomic Energy Act of 1946, the basic law governing our vast atomic enterprise. This new legislation was enacted by the Congress in pursuance of that recommendation. The new Act permits us, under proper security safeguards, to give our allies certain information that they must have for an effective defense against aggression. This information includes data needed for training in the use of and defense against atomic weapons and for evaluating the atomic capabilities of a potential aggressor. Agreements of this type with our allies will greatly strengthen our common defense and security. This Act also sets up procedures to encourage certain exchanges of non-military atomic technology. Thus it recognizes the excellence of the atomic energy programs in certain other nations, and the groundwork is laid for wider participation in the peacetime applications of atomic energy. For example, under the Act our technicians can assist friendly nations or groups of nations in building reactors for research and power. Also reflected in the new law is the fervent desire of our people to proceed with a plan for an International Atomic Energy Agency which would advance the peacetime applications of atomic energy, as we proposed last December to the United Nations. Although progress on this plan has been impeded by Soviet obstruction and delay, we intend to proceed--with the cooperation and participation of the Soviet Union if possible, without it if necessary. That it is time to draw more specifically into the national atomic energy program the initiative and resources of private industry is recognized in the new law. For instance, private industry is enabled to participate more fully in the development of economic nuclear power, while the Government continues to assist this progress with basic research and the building of experimental reactors. Debate on this legislation revealed some misunderstandings about the effect of certain of its provisions on public and private development of electrical power from the atom. I want our people to know that these provisions are designed eventually to relieve the taxpayer of the enormous cost of the commercial aspects of the enterprise, while fully protecting the public interest in atomic energy. In fact, these provisions carry into effect the 1946 policy declaration of the original Atomic Energy Act, that free competition in private enterprise should be strengthened. As I sign this bill, I am confident that it will advance both public and private development of atomic energy--that it will thus lead to greater national strength--and that programs undertaken as a result of this new law will help us progress more rapidly to the time when this new source of energy will be wholly devoted to the constructive purposes of man.",2008,obama
"BECAUSE OF great progress in the field of atomic energy during the past eight years, I recommended early this year that the Congress modernize the Atomic Energy Act of 1946, the basic law governing our vast atomic enterprise. This new legislation was enacted by the Congress in pursuance of that recommendation. The new Act permits us, under proper security safeguards, to give our allies certain information that they must have for an effective defense against aggression. This information includes data needed for training in the use of and defense against atomic weapons and for evaluating the atomic capabilities of a potential aggressor. Agreements of this type with our allies will greatly strengthen our common defense and security. This Act also sets up procedures to encourage certain exchanges of non-military atomic technology. Thus it recognizes the excellence of the atomic energy programs in certain other nations, and the groundwork is laid for wider participation in the peacetime applications of atomic energy. For example, under the Act our technicians can assist friendly nations or groups of nations in building reactors for research and power. Also reflected in the new law is the fervent desire of our people to proceed with a plan for an International Atomic Energy Agency which would advance the peacetime applications of atomic energy, as we proposed last December to the United Nations. Although progress on this plan has been impeded by Soviet obstruction and delay, we intend to proceed--with the cooperation and participation of the Soviet Union if possible, without it if necessary. That it is time to draw more specifically into the national atomic energy program the initiative and resources of private industry is recognized in the new law. For instance, private industry is enabled to participate more fully in the development of economic nuclear power, while the Government continues to assist this progress with basic research and the building of experimental reactors. Debate on this legislation revealed some misunderstandings about the effect of certain of its provisions on public and private development of electrical power from the atom. I want our people to know that these provisions are designed eventually to relieve the taxpayer of the enormous cost of the commercial aspects of the enterprise, while fully protecting the public interest in atomic energy. In fact, these provisions carry into effect the 1946 policy declaration of the original Atomic Energy Act, that free competition in private enterprise should be strengthened. As I sign this bill, I am confident that it will advance both public and private development of atomic energy--that it will thus lead to greater national strength--and that programs undertaken as a result of this new law will help us progress more rapidly to the time when this new source of energy will be wholly devoted to the constructive purposes of man.",2008,obama
"I HAVE WITHHELD my approval of S. 906, ""To establish the finality of contracts between the Government and common carriers of passengers and freight subject to the Interstate Commerce Act."" This legislation provides that rates established under the provisions of Section 22 of the Interstate Commerce Act, when accepted or agreed to by the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Agriculture, or the Administrator of General Services, or by any official or employee to whom the authority is delegated by them, shall be conclusively presumed to be just, reasonable, and otherwise lawful, and shall not be subject to attack, or reparation, after one hundred and eighty days, or two years in the case of contracts entered into during a national emergency declared by Congress, after the date of acceptance or agreement upon any grounds except actual fraud or deceit, or clerical mistake. The determination of what is a just, reasonable, or otherwise lawful' rate on interstate shipments is now vested in the Interstate Commerce Commission. All shippers, including the Government, are bound as a matter of contract to pay the agreed rate, whether it be in the form of a tariff rate or a Section 22 Quotation. This contractual obligation is subject, however, to an overriding right of the shipper to appeal to the Interstate Commerce Commission to determine whether the agreed rate is lawful. The statute of imitations for such action in the present law is two years. This Act would require the Government to determine the lawfulness of the rate, with finality, and through agencies other than the Interstate Commerce Commission, within one hundred and eighty days at ordinary times, or within two years during a national emergency declared by Congress. Whereas the commercial shipper could contest the rate while it is in effect, the Government would apparently be required to cancel or refuse the rate and pay higher charges during any test of the lawfulness of the rate. I am therefore unable to approve this legislation, which relegates the Government in its role as a user of transportation services to a position inferior to that of the general shipping public and restricts its access to the Interstate Commerce Commission, the body of experts authorized by Congress to determine the reasonableness of rates. I see no reason why the Government should not be subject to the same limitations on retroactive review of its freight charges as the commercial shipper. That result could be accomplished equitably by an amendment to Section 16(3 ) of the Interstate Commerce Act specifying that the Government shall be subject to the two year limitation presently applicable to commercial shippers. The Government would then be on exactly the same basis under that section as all other shippers, and existing inequities in the present rate-making relationships between the Government and the common carriers would be removed. I recommend that such legislation be enacted at the next Session of the Congress. DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER",2008,obama
"I HAVE WITHHELD my approval of S. 906, ""To establish the finality of contracts between the Government and common carriers of passengers and freight subject to the Interstate Commerce Act."" This legislation provides that rates established under the provisions of Section 22 of the Interstate Commerce Act, when accepted or agreed to by the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Agriculture, or the Administrator of General Services, or by any official or employee to whom the authority is delegated by them, shall be conclusively presumed to be just, reasonable, and otherwise lawful, and shall not be subject to attack, or reparation, after one hundred and eighty days, or two years in the case of contracts entered into during a national emergency declared by Congress, after the date of acceptance or agreement upon any grounds except actual fraud or deceit, or clerical mistake. The determination of what is a just, reasonable, or otherwise lawful' rate on interstate shipments is now vested in the Interstate Commerce Commission. All shippers, including the Government, are bound as a matter of contract to pay the agreed rate, whether it be in the form of a tariff rate or a Section 22 Quotation. This contractual obligation is subject, however, to an overriding right of the shipper to appeal to the Interstate Commerce Commission to determine whether the agreed rate is lawful. The statute of imitations for such action in the present law is two years. This Act would require the Government to determine the lawfulness of the rate, with finality, and through agencies other than the Interstate Commerce Commission, within one hundred and eighty days at ordinary times, or within two years during a national emergency declared by Congress. Whereas the commercial shipper could contest the rate while it is in effect, the Government would apparently be required to cancel or refuse the rate and pay higher charges during any test of the lawfulness of the rate. I am therefore unable to approve this legislation, which relegates the Government in its role as a user of transportation services to a position inferior to that of the general shipping public and restricts its access to the Interstate Commerce Commission, the body of experts authorized by Congress to determine the reasonableness of rates. I see no reason why the Government should not be subject to the same limitations on retroactive review of its freight charges as the commercial shipper. That result could be accomplished equitably by an amendment to Section 16(3 ) of the Interstate Commerce Act specifying that the Government shall be subject to the two year limitation presently applicable to commercial shippers. The Government would then be on exactly the same basis under that section as all other shippers, and existing inequities in the present rate-making relationships between the Government and the common carriers would be removed. I recommend that such legislation be enacted at the next Session of the Congress. DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER",2008,obama
"I HAVE WITHHELD my approval from H.R. 951, ""For the relief of the Trust Association of H. Kempner."" This bill would provide an indirect means for payment of approximately one million dollars by the United States for certain peacetime commercial losses of the Kempner Trust Association. To accomplish this purpose the bill would require the Court of Claims to determine the amount that the Trust Association lost as a result of cotton sales made to certain private business firms in Germany during 1923 and 1924. The bill would then require that the Court of Claims determine how much of the property seized during World War I by the United States from a German firm wholly unconnected with Kempner or the cotton sales-Germann and Company--had been lost through improper administration by the Alien Property Custodian. The determined amount of the loss of the Germann and Company vested property would be then withdrawn from the War Claims Fund and used to compensate the Kempner Trust Association to the extent of its loss. Following World War I the Kempner Trust Association through subsidiary corporations entered into contracts for the sale of cotton with a number of German textile manufacturers for future delivery. A fall in cotton prices before delivery led the German firms to breach their contracts with the Association. The amounts payable by the German debtors on account of the breaches of contract, as determined by judgments and negotiated settlements, could not be paid through the subsequent period before World War II because of German foreign exchange controls, and, as a result, the Trust Association lost money on the transactions. These losses would be paid by the United States if this bill were enacted although it is clear that the United States bears no moral or legal liability for the transactions which resulted in the losses in question. Moreover, the method of payment proposed by the bill raises serious questions of propriety. The matter involving Germann and Company has no relationship to the claim which the Kempner Trust Association seeks to have paid. During World War I the Alien Property Custodian had seized the property of Germann and Company, a firm in the Philippines, as enemy property. When the property was returned to Germann and Company, following enactment of legislation authorizing return of seized property after World War I, it was claimed that the firm's assets had been depleted by approximately one million dollars during the period of its administration by the Alien Property Custodian through allegedly improper payments. The Treaty of Berlin which terminated World War I between the United States and Germany, however, precludes Germann and Company from asserting any claim against the United States on account of the seizure of its property or any losses during the period it was held by the United States. There is therefore no valid claim to be asserted by Germann and Company as the basis for the proposed determination by the Court of Claims. Even if such a claim existed, however, the proposed payment of its proceeds to the Kempner Trust Association instead of to Germann and Company would not appear to be a proper disposition of the fights of the latter company. Furthermore, the bill confers upon the United States Court of Claims jurisdiction to sit in judgment upon the acts of the former German government with respect to acts committed in Germany. I am informed that this would be contrary to a well-recognized principle of international law and practice. For these reasons, the purpose and method of payment would not appear justified. Moreover, enactment of this bill would establish an undesirable precedent for the assumption by the United States for the commercial losses of American citizens, even where no governmental sponsorship of the commercial venture appeared. It would also set an undesirable precedent for the use of the German and Japanese assets vested during World War II for commercial losses suffered during peacetime in lieu of their present use through the War Claims fund as the source of payment of the wartime personal injury damages suffered by American nationals. Accordingly, I am constrained to withhold my approval from the bill. DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER",2008,obama
"Thank you. Everybody, please have a seat. Have a seat.Well, first of all, you want Karen and Bonnie having your back because you can tell that they're not going to take no for an answer. [Laughter] It is just a thrill to be here. I want to thank both of them. I also want to thank Bobby and Rob, because, like me, they don't shine quite as brightly as their spouses. [Laughter] But nevertheless, we are extremely fortunate to be improving our gene pool because of who we married.A couple of other people I just want to acknowledge. First of all, your outstanding Members of Congress: Chellie Pingree is here; somebody who always is fighting for working people, Mike Michaud is here. One of the true statesmen in the history of American politics, George Mitchell is here. Your former Governor, John Baldacci is here. And one of the best SBA Administrators of all time, Karen Mills is in the house.Now, I will confess that part of the reason I came here was Michelle just had too good a time. [Laughter] She came up here, and she came back, and she was all, ""Oh, we had so much fun, and everybody was so nice, and they all thought I was so much better than you, and""--[laughter]--and I said, ""Hold on, time out, time out."" [Laughter] I said, ""I got to get up there too.""I should point out, by the way, that during Michelle's birthday, I did the same thing: I brought a birthday cake and a check. [Laughter] So that's where they got the idea. [Laughter]I could not be more grateful to all of you for just the extraordinary reception and hospitality. There are a lot of you who were involved in 2008, and a lot of you who have signed up for a second tour of duty here. And it's truly moving to me, and every time I've come to Maine, we have had this extraordinary reception. And people I think have not just been supportive financially, but more importantly, through organizing and knocking on doors and making phone calls, which has obviously been the hallmark of all our effort and dates back to my own history in politics.I'm going to speak very briefly at the top because I want to save a lot of time for questions and answers and comments and advice. [Laughter]We've gone through a tough 3 years, this country, as tough as any in our lifetime: the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, the economic aftermath that left millions without work, a collapsed housing market. It's hard to remember sometimes how perilous things were when I was sworn in. The month I was sworn into office, we lost 800,000 jobs in that month alone. We had lost almost 4 million in the months before I took office. And then we would just keep on shedding jobs for the first few months that I was sworn in. The banks were locked up, so even blue-chip companies couldn't get credit. People, I think, genuinely thought that you might see a world financial meltdown. And nobody exactly knew where the bottom was. The stock market, by the way, was about half of what it is today.And that meant we had to move fast to save the auto industry, to get the banks lending again, to make sure that State governments and local governments didn't have to lay off even more teachers and first-responders and others that were providing vital services, but frankly, the States and local governments were having trouble being able to afford.And we moved so fast that in some ways, people didn't fully appreciate the scope and magnitude of what got done in those first 6 months, that first year. Here's the good news: As you look back, from where we were to where we are now, over the last 2 years we've created almost 4 million jobs. We have the strongest manufacturing job growth since the 1990s. The auto industry is back, stronger than it was before. GM is once again the number-one auto company in the world, making profits that are higher than at any time in its 100-year history. We have seen the unemployment rate start ticking down. We're seeing companies hiring again, companies investing again. There's a sense that things have stabilized and that we can start getting back to where we were before this terrible storm.But here's the thing. I ran for office not just to get back to the status quo; I ran for office--I ran for this office because we had not tended to a set of challenges that had been building up for decades. And that's why even as we were trying to right the ship and yank ourselves out of a potential depression, we did not take our eye off the commitments that I had made to you when I ran for office.And that's why we fulfilled pledges to end ""don't ask, don't tell,"" or to sign the Lilly Ledbetter act that ensures equal pay for equal work. That's why we followed through on commitments to invest in clean energy and doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars and trucks in an unprecedented fashion.That's why we followed through on the commitment I made to make sure that people don't go bankrupt when they get sick and passed the Affordable Care Act. And already, you've got 2.5 million young people who have health insurance because of it. And already, everybody here who has insurance has protections that are more robust than the patient's bill of rights that had been debated in the 1990s and that had never gotten done. And seniors are benefiting from lower prescription drugs because of it. And small businesses are getting subsidies so that they can provide health insurance to their workers.That's why we followed through and ended the war in Iraq. That's why we followed through and targeted Al Qaida. That's why, with Usama bin Laden gone and Al Qaida weakened, we've been able to start ramping down our involvement in Afghanistan and provide transition so that Afghans can take control of their own country. That's why we ended torture and we put our fight against terrorism on a legal footing. And that's why we worked to restore our respect around the world.So, in addition to trying to stabilize the economy, we've tried to deal with issues like energy and health care and education, where we've made more strides in terms of reforming the system than probably the previous 30 years just in the last 3, making sure that college is more affordable. We've been focused on those things because those are the foundations for long-term growth, long-term sustainable growth that is inclusive, that says everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody plays by the same set of rules.Now, in some ways, this election, then, becomes more important than 2008, not only to preserve the gains that had been made, but also to finish the task that we set ourselves--that we set for ourselves in 2008. Because we still have more work to do. We still have too many folks who are unemployed, which means that we've got to make sure that we've got a Tax Code that's incentivizing investment here in the United States, and we're enforcing our trade laws so that there's a level playing field, and we're training our workers to make sure that they can compete in this 21st-century globalized economy.It means that we've got to sustain the work we've done making investments in research and development so that the breakthroughs in biotech or clean energy happen here in the United States.It means that we have to preserve the gains we've made when it comes to respecting science. But it also means that when it comes to education, we've still got kids who are dropping out, unable to read, and they can't compete in this global economy. So we're going to have to do more work there.It means we've got to invest in infrastructure. We used to have the best roads, the best bridges, the best rail lines. We don't anymore. And now is the time to rebuild America.We still have to do more when it comes to energy, because as much progress as we've made over the last few years, the fact of the matter is, is that we still are importing too much oil and our economy is still subject to the whims of what happens in the Middle East. And our environment is still captive to our addiction to fossil fuels.We've still got to reform an immigration system that's broken, because I believe we're a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants, and we can reconcile those two values, make this country stronger, because we continue to be a magnet for incredible talent from all around the world.So the task before us still looms large. And the other side doesn't have answers to these questions. You don't see them debating how we improve our education system. You don't see them engaging in any serious way about how we're going to retrain our workers. There's not a conversation about how we restore manufacturing in this country.They've got one message and that is, we're going to make sure that we cut people's taxes even more, so that by every objective measure our deficit is worse. And we will slash Government investments that have made this country great, not because it's going to balance the budget, but because it's driven by our ideological vision about how Government should be. That's their agenda, pure and simple.And so we probably have not seen an election where the contrast is that sharp between the two parties as in this election. Keep in mind, when I ran in 2008, we had a Republican candidate who believed in climate change--[laughter]--who had worked on immigration reform, who had not ruled out the possibility that the wealthy might pay a little bit more as part of an overall package to reduce our deficit. But that's not what we have right now.So there's a lot at stake. But the good news is, as I travel around the country, part of what sustained me each and every day--people sometimes ask, boy, you're working pretty long hours, and people are calling you pretty nasty names, and how do you put up with all that? And I tell them, in addition to having this remarkable family and having a rule of not watching television--[laughter]--what also sustains me is just the American people. When you go out there and you meet them, they're resilient. They're tough. They've got good sense. They have strong values.And although this is a big, messy democracy and politics has always been contentious in this country, my confidence in the American people is undiminished. And my energy, my absolute certainty that we can be doing better and that if we follow the course that America is going to be in a stronger position today than it was 4 years ago, that determination is as strong as ever.If you are just as determined and you're willing to work just as hard as we did 4 years ago, then we're going to win. And more importantly, we're going to make sure that this country is everything that it deserves to be.Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, everybody. Thank you. Thank you so much. Everybody, please have a seat. Thank you so much. Well, nice job, everybody. [Laughter] What an extraordinary event. It is wonderful to be here with so many old friends and new friends as well.A couple of people I just want to say a special thank you to: first of all, somebody who is a class act and cares about working families, has been working so hard for so many years, first in the House, now our junior Senator from the great State of Maryland, Ben Cardin. Thank you. I also want to acknowledge somebody who is going to be critical to what's happening this year because he is going to be our host for the Democratic National Convention, the mayor of the great city of Charlotte, Anthony Foxx is in the house.Now, it is good to see all of you.Audience member. Good to see you!The President. Well, thank you. [Laughter]Obviously, I have, every once in a while, a little bit of time to reflect in between a few responsibilities as President--[laughter]--and coaching Sasha's basketball team--[laughter]--and making sure I'm doing what I'm told by my wife. And so I think back to the last 3 years. And I think back to all the work we did in 2008 and all the people who were involved in this remarkable journey that we've been on. And I'm reminded that, let's face it, back in 2008, the reason why you guys got involved and supported me was not because it was a sure thing. [Laughter] I was not the odds-on favorite. [Laughter] Whenever you support somebody named Barack Hussein Obama to run for President of the United States--[laughter]--you're betting on the underdog.But the reason that so many of you put your heart and soul into the campaign, the reason that I decided to run, despite having a pretty young family and asking enormous sacrifices from them, was because we shared a vision about what America should be. We shared commitments to each other about who we are as a people and what we want to leave behind for our children and our grandchildren.And that's what the campaign was about. It was about bringing about change not for change's sake, but bringing about change because there were certain values that we cared deeply about and we didn't see those values reflected in the policies of our Government. And we worried about the future.Now, this was all before we knew that we were entering into the worst financial crisis and the worst economic crisis that any of us have seen in our lifetimes. We didn't understand that we would be losing 4 million jobs in the 6 months before I took office and another 4 million just in the few months after I took office, 800,000 jobs the month I was sworn in. We didn't realize the magnitude of the collapse of the housing industry and the possibility that we might dip into a great depression.But we did understand that for too long, for too many people, the basic American compact, the basic idea that if you work hard, if you're responsible, if you're looking after your family, that you should be able to find a job that pays a living wage, and you should be able to have health insurance so that you don't worry about going bankrupt if somebody in your family gets sick, that you should be able to send your kids to college and aspire to higher heights than you ever achieved, that you should be able to retire with some dignity and respect. We understood that that basic compact for too many people felt like it was slipping away.And so the vision we shared was an American where everybody gets a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules. That's what we were fighting for that basic American promise.And as we reflect back over the last 3 years, as tough a 3 years as this country has seen in a very long time, we understand that we've still got a lot of work to do. We're not there yet. But we can take some pride--you can take some pride--in knowing that because of the actions you took in 2008, we've brought about a lot of the change that we believed in.Think about it. Change is the first legislation that I signed into law, the Lilly Ledbetter Act that has a very simple principle: Women should get paid an equal day's pay for an equal day's work, and our daughters should be treated just like our sons when it comes to the workplace. That's what change is. That happened because of you.Because of you, we were able to save an auto industry and a million jobs that go with it, even when there were a whole bunch of people that were arguing that we should let Detroit go bankrupt. I wasn't about to let that happen. You weren't about to let that happen. And now GM is once again the number-one automaker in the world, seeing record profits. We've seen hundreds of thousands of folks hired back and the economies that are impacted by the auto industry strengthened all across the Midwest. That happened because of you.And not only did we save the auto industry, but they're now making better cars. [Laughter] And along with it, we decided we weren't going to wait for Congress: We went ahead and doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars so that by the middle of the next decade every auto is going to be getting 55 miles per gallon, and that's going to save the average family $8,000 in their costs at the pump, not to mention all the carbon that's being taken out of the atmosphere so that we can potentially preserve this precious planet of ours. That happened because of you.Because of you, you don't have to worry about who you love to serve the country you love, because we ended ""don't ask, don't tell,"" as we committed to. That's what change is. Because of you we took $60 billion that were going to banks in the student loan program, we said, why don't we give that money directly to students. And so there are millions of young people who are getting more Pell grants or qualify for the first time and are able to finance college. That happened because of you.Because of you, right now 2.5 million young people have health insurance that didn't have it before, and millions of seniors have seen lower prescription drug prices--because of you. And we are going to insure another 30 million people in this country, and we are making sure if you've got health insurance, that they can't drop you when you get sick, the strongest patient protection bill that we've ever seen when it comes to health care. That all happened because of you. That's what change is.And change is keeping the promise--one of the promises I made in 2008. We ended the war in Iraq. And we refocused our attention on those who actually attacked us on 9/11. And Al Qaida is on its last legs, weaker than it's ever been. And Usama bin Laden is no longer around. And we are transitioning out of Afghanistan. And we've raised America's respect all around the world. That happened because of you.So all this shouldn't make us complacent. We should not be satisfied. We didn't simply work that hard in 2008 just to clean up the mess that had been left. We got involved and engaged because we understood there were challenges that had been building up over decades that had to be attended to. And we've still got more work to do. The job is not done.There are still way too many people all across this country that are desperately looking for work. I get letters from them every day, people who are well educated, people who don't have the education they need, but they want to work, and they are sending out rsums, they are pounding the pavement, and they are knocking on doors, and they're worried about their future.There are folks who have a job, but are having trouble paying the bills, and maybe they've seen the value of their home drop by $10,000, $20,000, $100,000, and they don't know if they're ever going to be able to recover what they thought was their life savings.We've got people who had decided they've got to forgo retirement, just completely change their plans, just so they can make sure that their children or their grandchildren can still afford college. And we've got young people who have gone to college and racked up a whole bunch of debt and aren't sure whether they can find a job that allows them to pay it off. There are still too many folks for whom that American promise is not yet a reality: good people, responsible people, patriotic people.Now, understanding that we haven't finished the job yet should invigorate us. It should inspire us to work that much harder. But if that's not sufficient, then it's important to understand that the last thing that we can afford to do is go back to the same economic policies that got us into this mess in the first place, the same economic policies that have betrayed that American promise for too long. And that's exactly what the other side is proposing.I gave a speech on Tuesday about the congressional budget that's been proposed by the Republicans in the House of Representatives, a budget that Governor Romney, who is the frontrunner in the Republican side, has embraced, said the budget was ""marvelous,"" he said. [Laughter] And when you go through this budget, the vision that it portrays is of an America where everybody is fending for themselves, a few are doing very well at the top, and everybody else is struggling to get by.And the Government is shrunk to the point where things that we take for granted as a society--as an advanced, responsible society--are gutted: education, science and research, early childhood education, caring for our environment, looking after our veterans, keeping up with our infrastructure, rebuilding our roads and our bridges so that they're safe, food safety laws, our capacity to enforce basic consumer protections. All of this is shrunk to the point of near invisibility.And the rationale they provide is, well, the biggest crisis we face is the deficit, so we need to do something about it; we've got to make tough choices. They're absolutely right about that. Unfortunately, the vision that they're presenting adds to the deficit problem because they say they're going to cut more taxes for the wealthiest Americans after we have seen the tax rates for wealthy Americans go to below anyplace that they've been since I've been alive.The contrast between visions in this election could not be more stark, because I believe that America is stronger when we're looking for one another. I believe in the free market. I believe that the private sector is the true generator of job growth. I believe that there are times where government doesn't have the answers, but like most previous Presidents, Democrat and Republican, I understand that we have a role in making sure that not just the powerful do well, but that everybody has got a shot.I believe we have to make an investment in education because I know from my own life and from Michelle's life that we would not be where we were unless somebody had made an investment in us.I believe in investing in basic research and science because I understand that all these extraordinary companies that are these enormous wealth generators, many of them would have never been there--Google, Facebook would not exist--had it not been for investments that we made as a country in basic science and research. I understand that makes us all better off.I believe that it is part of our solemn responsibility to future generations that we look after this planet, that we make sure our air is clean and our water is clean, that we're not poisoning our kids.I believe our economy does better--one of the things that has made our economy work so well is its transparency and its rule of law, and that consumers are protected, and we have some confidence, if we go into the store and we buy a product, that it's going to be safe. We've set standards that allowed us not only to create a national market, but help to create an international market. We set the standard. That worked for us. That was good for business. It didn't weaken us.I believe that in a society as wealthy as ours, we should have a commitment to our seniors and to the disabled. That's not a sign of weakness. That's not socialism. The idea that you want to care for people in our communities so our seniors don't have to plunge into poverty, that they have some modicum of security if they need health care, that a family that has been stricken by an illness doesn't have to worry if they're going to lose their home, that makes us stronger.I believe in making sure that workers are able to work in a safe environment, that they get paid a decent wage, because I understand the same thing Henry Ford understood when he said, you know what, I want to make sure that my workers can afford to buy my cars. That broad-based prosperity, bottom-up economic growth is what sustains us. That's what I believe, and that's what you believe. And that's what animated our campaign in 2008.So we are going to have a big, important debate in this country, and I cannot wait, because we have tried what they are selling. It's not like we didn't try it. We have tried what they're peddling, and it did not work. [Laughter] And we have been spending the last 3 years cleaning after some of that mess. And I don't want to have to do it again.So we're going to keep on in a direction that has created 4 million jobs in the last 2 years. And we're going to keep on in a direction that has seen manufacturing in America coming back. And we're going to stay on the course that is helping us to double our exports so that we're not just known as a society that buys and consumes, but a society that creates and innovates and sells all around the world.And we're going to continue to double down on education reform so that every young American knows that they can get the skills they need to succeed in this society. And we're going to produce American-made energy. And we're going to take an all-of-the-above strategy.And we actually are seeing the highest oil production in this country in 8 years. Our imports have diminished below 50 percent, the lowest they've been in 13 years. So we're producing more oil. We're producing more gas. But we're also going to produce more clean energy: more wind and more solar and more biofuels. It's the smart thing to do. It's good for business. It's good for our environment. And I'm not going to cede those industries to other countries.And we're going to continue on a course in foreign policy that maintains the strongest military on Earth, but also understands that we've got to have as powerful a diplomatic strategy, as powerful an economic strategy that we are exporting our values and upholding core ideas about how women are treated and how the young are treated and how minorities are treated, because that's part of what makes us special. That's part of what makes us exceptional.So this is going to be a big debate. And it's going to be a fun debate--[laughter]--because it's always good to have the truth on your side. But it's not going to be easy. It's not going to be easy. We're going to have to work hard. There are a lot of folks out there still struggling. And there are a lot of folks who, understandably, seeing what goes on in Washington, sometimes lose heart, and they get cynical. Maybe some of you do sometimes.You say to yourself, you know what, it just doesn't seem like things are on the level. It doesn't seem like people are thinking about me or my community. And they see the amounts of money that are being spent and the special interests that dominate and the lobbyists that always have access, and they say to themselves, maybe I don't count. They get discouraged. And that makes this tougher in some ways.Back in 2008, being an Obama supporter, that was fresh and new, and I didn't have any gray hair. [Laughter] And this time, we're all a little older. We're a little wiser. Here is the thing I want to communicate to you though. That spirit that we're all in this together, that spirit that Abraham Lincoln understood and Teddy Roosevelt understood and Dwight Eisenhower understood--it wasn't just FDR and Johnson and Kennedy, because it's not a Democratic or a Republican idea, it's an American idea--that spirit may not always be evident in Washington, but it's still out there in the country.You still see it in town halls. You still see it in churches or synagogues. You still see it in our amazing men and women in uniform. They still understand that we're stronger together than we can ever be on our own. They still understand an America in which everybody has a fair shot, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter what your last name.And so if we're energized, if we're determined, that core sense of decency and possibility and hope, it's still out there. But we have to make sure that we are determined. I used to say in 2008 that this wasn't going to be easy, I'm not a perfect man, I'm not going to be a perfect President. But I used to tell people, I'd always tell you what I thought, I'll always tell you where I stood, and I wake up every morning thinking about how I could work as hard as I could to make sure that every American had a chance, every American felt that sense of possibility that I've lived out in my own life.And I've kept that promise. I have kept that promise. And my hope is that you are willing to continue on this journey with me, that you're willing to work just as hard or harder than you did in 2008. Not just writing a check. I need you to get on the phone. I need you to knock on doors. I need some of you to do what you did last time: travel to other States and talk to your friends and your neighbors and your coworkers and fight back against the cynicism and answer the lies that may come up.I am as determined--I am more determined than I was in 2008. I hope you are too. Because if you are, we will finish what we started, and we'll remind ourselves just why it is that this is the greatest country on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"Thank you very much. The only title you forgot was husband of Michelle--[laughter]--father of Malia and Sasha and Bo. [Laughter]I have to first of all thank Hansel and Paula for opening up their extraordinary home to us, and your wonderful hospitality. Please give them a big round of applause. Grateful for your friendship and grateful for your support.A couple other people I want to acknowledge. First of all, your outstanding Senator from the great State of Florida, Bill Nelson is in the house. More importantly, his lovely wife Grace is in the house. And we also have Congresswoman and head of the DNC, Debbie Wasserman Schultz.So I'm going to be very brief at the outset because I want to spend most of my time in conversation with you, take questions, get some comments, advice, tips. But let me just start off by saying it's undeniable we've gone through as tough a 3 years as we've seen in our lifetimes. I like to remind people that when I took office, that month we lost 800,000 jobs. We had lost 4 million jobs in the 6 months preceding me taking office. We lost another 6--another 4 million jobs in the few months right after I took office. The housing market had collapsed. The banking system was locked up. And there was a very real threat that we would tip into a second Great Depression. And what that meant is we had to act quickly and boldly and, at times, in ways that weren't popular politically.So the auto industry was on the verge of collapse, which would have meant the loss of a million jobs as well as an iconic industry in the United States that generations of middle class families had depended on. And we had to act quickly. And there were those who said let that industry go bankrupt. But we said that wouldn't be the right thing to do; it wouldn't be good for America long term.We had to intervene in the banks in ways that got folks on the left and the right upset. But the fact of the matter is, is that finance is the lifeblood of industry, and had we not been able to unlock financing for large and small businesses alike, we would have seen more and more businesses close. We had to pass a Recovery Act. And there were those who said, why are we going to be helping States keep teachers and police officers on the job, they should be able to handle it themselves. Why are we helping families on hard times by extending unemployment insurance? But what I tried to explain was that this was important not just for those individuals who get help, but it was important for the economy as a whole, because we had to make sure that there was enough aggregate demand out there, at a time when everybody was panicking, in order to keep the economy moving.So a lot of tough decisions. But 3 years later, we can look back and say that we've made progress, that we're moving on the right track. Over the last 2 years, we've created over 4 million jobs, 600,000 just in the last quarter alone. The auto industry has come back. GM is now the number-one automaker again in the world, recorded the highest profits in its history. Across the board, we're seeing businesses large and small starting to hire again and feel a little more confident about the prospects of the economy.Now, things are still tough out there, and we've still got a long ways to go, but there's no doubt that the economy is getting stronger, businesses are hiring again, the stock market is back. And the question then becomes, how do we build on what we've been able to do over the last several years to deal with some underlying problems that actually preceded the recession? Because I ran for office in 2008 not just to get back to the status quo; we had put off making some tough decisions for decades on issues that are of critical importance for America to be able to compete in the 21st century.That's why we put so much effort into our education system and have prompted reforms in over 40 States who are now, from top to bottom, rethinking how they're training teachers, how they're hiring teachers, how they're holding schools accountable, how instead of teaching to the test, we're unleashing creativity and passion in the classroom, but also making sure that teachers and principals and students are accountable to success, and how are we going to finance college educations. We had a student loan system where billions of dollars were actually going to banks to manage loans that were federally guaranteed. We said let's just give them straight to students, and as a consequence we've opened up affordability for millions of students in need, because my goal is to make sure that once again we've got the highest college graduation rate of any country in the world.That's why we took on energy. And Hansel mentioned--a model utility, what's going on down here Florida. Our goal has been that if we want to succeed in the 21st century, that we can't just depend on one source of energy and we certainly can't keep importing oil from some of the most volatile parts of the world.And so what have we done? Over the last 3 years, because we've doubled fuel efficiency standards in cars, because we expanded clean energy investments like no previous administration, we've actually seen our oil imports decline to below 50 percent for the first time in 13 years. Oil production is still up. I know folks are still struggling with high gas prices, but we're moving in the right direction, where we can actually potentially achieve energy independence and put folks back to work in the process.That's why we took on health care reform, not only because it's excusable to have 30 to 40 million people in a country as wealthy as ours potentially bankrupt every time somebody in their family gets sick, but also because it was breaking the bank for businesses and the Government and for individuals.And even now, without the health care plan fully implemented, 2.5 million young people have health insurance who didn't have it before because they can stay on their parent's plan. And millions of seniors out there are getting discounts on their prescription drugs. And everybody can have preventive care as part of their insurance policies, including women getting the preventive care that they need in order to succeed, in order to be healthier.And so the point is, is that our goal has not just been to make sure we didn't go into a depression, our goal is to--how do we build on the successes that are necessary for us to compete in this 21st-century economy that's going to be tougher than ever.Now, we got an election coming up. I don't know if you guys are aware of that. [Laughter] And let me preface this by saying I'm a firm believer that whether you're a Democrat or a Republican, that you're a patriot, you care about this country, you love this country. And so I'm not somebody who, when we're in a political contest, suggests somehow that one side or the other has a monopoly on love of country.But there are contrasting visions here. And this election will probably have the biggest contrast that we've seen maybe since the Johnson-Goldwater election, maybe before that. Because my vision, Bill Nelson's vision, the Democratic vision is one that says that free market is the key to economic growth, that we don't need to build Government just for the sake of expanding its reach, but there are certain things we have to do--whether it's investments in education or basic science and research or caring for the most vulnerable among us and creating an effective safety net--that we have to do, because we can't do it on our own, each of us individually. The same way that we don't have privatized fire services or police services or defense, well, there are some things that we've got to do together, that we do better together. And that's part of how we became an economic powerhouse.And the Republicans in this race, they've got a fundamentally different idea. Their basic deal is that if they dismantle Government investments in infrastructure or clean energy research or education, if they give it all away in tax cuts to folks like me and some of you who don't need them and weren't even asking for them, that that somehow makes America stronger.And I fundamentally disagree. That's not how our middle class got built. That's not what the GI bill was about. That's not what building the Hoover Dam or Golden Gate Bridge was all about. That's not what sending--as Bill knows better than anybody--a man to the Moon was all about. Our greatness as a nation has always been because we rise together and we have a broad-based prosperity, and we build a middle class where everybody who wants to work hard, everybody who's willing to put all their effort into it, they can make it, regardless of what they look like, where they come from, what their last name is.That's our vision for America. That's what's at stake in this election. And I think for all the debate that takes place in Washington, the American people understand that. And that's why I'm confident we're going to win. But we're not going to win without your help. So everybody here is going to have to exhibit the same kind of enthusiasm and energy and passion as you did back in 2008.I know I'm a little older and--[laughter]--hair is a little grayer. It may not be as fashionable to be on the Obama bandwagon as it was back then. But my determination is undiminished, and the need for your involvement is as important as ever. So, if all of you are willing to invest in the future the same way that our parents and our grandparents and our great-grandparents invested in the future, I'm confident America's best days are still ahead. But we're going to have to work for it. We're going to have to earn it. And that's what this election will be all about.Thank you very much, everybody.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody. Well, first of all, let me thank Jeremy, who has been a friend for a long time. He supported me at a time when nobody could pronounce my name and had great faith, probably because I think we're both basketball fans and he was impressed with my knowledge, although his seats at games are generally better than mine. [Laughter]And I want to thank Jeremy's family for taking the time to be here and his lovely mom and sisters. And Kirk Wagar, who has just been working so hard on my behalf not just this time out, but the previous time out, we appreciate you.Debbie Wasserman Schultz, who is not only a outstanding Member of Congress and a great mom, but is also doing wonderful work on behalf of the DNC, we appreciate her. Thank you, Florida, for sending her into the national spotlight.And Mayor Anthony Foxx, he is going to be our host in Charlotte, when we have our convention, and so we're glad that he's here as well.And of course, I appreciate all of you. Some of you have been great friends in other venues, and we appreciate everything that you do.I'm going to be very brief at the top because I want to spend most of my time answering questions and getting comments and thoughts from you. We've gone through 3 of the toughest years in our lifetimes: an economy that almost tipped into a Great Depression, an auto industry that almost went belly up, a banking system that froze, millions of people losing their jobs, a housing market that collapsed, a world economic crisis that began just a little bit before I was sworn into office. And we've been fighting to bring America back ever since.The good news is we're making enormous progress on a whole range of fronts. The auto industry is back on its feet, selling cars. GM is making regular profits and is the number-one automaker again in the world, and they're making better cars. We've made progress in doubling fuel efficiency standards on cars that help our environment and are reducing--is reducing our dependence on foreign oil. Actually, each year that I've been in office we've been importing less oil, even as the economy has become more productive and is growing: 4 million jobs over the last 2 years, the best manufacturing job growth since the 1990s, 600,000 jobs just in the last 3 months alone.So we're making progress, but I think all of us understand that we've still got a lot more work to do, partly because we haven't fully recovered from the depths of this crisis. There are still too many people out there who are looking for work, there are still too many homes that are underwater--Florida, the economy here is still suffering from the headwinds of the housing market and its collapse. But partly because when we ran for office, when I ran for office in 2008, the goal wasn't just to get back to where we were in 2007. Because even then, even before the economic crisis had hit--the financial crisis had hit, we had seen a decade in which job growth was sluggish and incomes and wages for ordinary people didn't just flatline, they actually went down when you factored in inflation.That sense of middle class security, the sense that if you worked hard you could get ahead, support a family, send your kids to college, retire with dignity and respect, that sense of security had been slipping away for too many people. And the goal in 2008 was to make those changes, to get rid of those obstacles, to reform systems that had had problems for decades so that middle class Americans and people who aspire to get in the middle class would once again have a chance. An economy that was characterized by everybody having a fair shot and everybody doing their fair share and everybody playing by the same set of rules, that's what we've been fighting for.And that's why in addition to just dealing with the immediate crisis, in addition to dealing with two wars--ending one, transitioning in another--in addition to going after bin Laden and making sure that we degraded the Al Qaida network, in addition to restoring America's respect in the world, in addition to all the things we've done in foreign policy, in crisis management, what we've tried to do is also make sure that we're dealing with those long-term barriers to economic growth and prosperity, broad-based prosperity.So that means having an energy policy that emphasizes clean energy and solar and wind power and all those things that are going to allow us to stay at the cutting edge in the 21st century. It means reforming our education system--K-12, community colleges, and 4-year colleges and universities--so that we've got the best workforce in the world in this more competitive environment that we're in.It means dealing with health care, not only to make sure that 30 million people get health care that didn't have it before so nobody is bankrupt when they get sick in this country, but also to start rationalizing the system so that it is more efficient, provides better care, lowers costs, is a good deal for everybody.And it means making sure that we've got a budget, a tax system, that is fair so that you don't have Warren Buffett paying a lower tax rate than his secretary, so that we can lower the deficits and make investments that we need in the future generations--in rebuilding our infrastructure and investing in basic science and research, college loans for students--but doing so in a way that's paid for. And part of paying for it is, folks like me and many of you, making sure that we are doing our fair bit.Now, the other side has a just fundamentally different view of these issues, and that's before we start talking about things like the courts and access to justice and women's rights and voting rights and a whole range of social concerns where, again, there is a--immigration--where there is a big contrast between what the other side is peddling and what I think is needed to make this country strong. So you're probably going to have as big a contrast in this election as we've seen in a very long time. And that means that we may have to work even harder than we did in 2008.The good news is, I think the American people are on our side. I think the American people understand that this country is stronger when we come together and we're looking out for one another and we're thinking about the future and not just the next election. But they expect to see us fight for them. And that's what I intend to keep doing, with your help, for the next 4 1/2 years.So thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Florida!Audience member. We love you!The President. I love you back.It is good to be back in the Sunshine State. Well, there are some folks here I want to acknowledge. Everybody, have a seat. Relax. I've got a few things to say. [Laughter] First of all, your own Debbie Wasserman Schultz is in the house. Outstanding Members of Congress: Ted Deutch is here; Federica Wilson is here. Our Florida finance chair, Kirk Wagar is here. Broward County finance chair, Andrew Weinstein is here.The outstanding John Legend is in the house. John wanted me to sing a duet. I said no. [Laughter] Not tonight, but maybe if you practice a little bit. [Laughter] And I want to thank Gerri Ann for that wonderful introduction. Give her a big round of applause as well.Now, I am here not just because the weather is really good. [Laughter] I'm not here just because there are a lot of great friends in the audience. And I'm not even here just because I need your help. I'm here because your country needs your help. A lot of you got involved in this campaign back in 2008. Some of you worked your hearts out. It wasn't, by the way, because you thought it was going to be easy. When you support a guy named Barack Hussein Obama for President--[Laughter]--you're not looking at the oddsmakers. You don't need a poll to know that's not a sure thing. [Laughter]You didn't join the campaign just because of me. This wasn't just about a candidate; this was about a vision that we shared for America, a vision that all of you shared. It wasn't a vision where people are left to fend for themselves and the most powerful can play by their own rules. It was a vision of America where everybody works hard, everybody is responsible, and everybody has a chance to get ahead, not just those at the very top. The notion that no matter where you come from, what you look like, what your last name is--Black, White, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, disabled or not--it doesn't matter, you've got a shot at the American Dream.That's the vision we shared. That's the change that we believed in. And we knew it wasn't going to come easy. We knew it wouldn't come quickly. But we had confidence and faith in the American people and our capacity to bring about an America that was moving closer to our ideals. And you know what, in just a little over 3 years, because of what you did in 2008, we've started to see what change looks like.Change is the first bill I signed into law that says women deserve an equal day's pay for an equal day's work. Our daughters should have the same opportunities as our sons. You made that happen.Change is the decisions that we made to help prevent a second Great Depression, to rescue the American auto industry from collapse, even when some politicians were out there saying we should let Detroit go bankrupt. We had a million jobs on the line if we had let that happen. And I wasn't going to let that happen. And today, GM is back on top as the world's number-one automaker, making record profits, hiring back workers. More than 200,000 new jobs over the last 2 1/2 years in the American auto industry, it is coming back. That happened because of you.Change is the decision we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our oil addiction. We doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars and trucks. And by the middle of the next decade, we're going to be driving American-made cars that get almost 55 miles to a gallon, saves the typical family $8,000 at the pump. That happened because of you.We decided let's stop handing out $60 billion in taxpayer giveaways to banks that were managing the student loan program, let's give the money directly to students. And because of you, millions of young people have gotten help affording college and being able to compete in this 21st-century economy. That happened because of your work back in 2008 and beyond.Yes, change is health care reform that we passed after a century of trying, reform that says in the United States of America, the greatest country on Earth, nobody should go broke because they get sick. And because of that law, right now 2.5 million young people have health insurance that didn't have it before because they can stay on their parents' plans.Right now millions of seniors are paying less for their prescription drugs. Right now every American has the assurance that they can't be denied coverage or dropped by their insurance company when they need care the most. And they can get preventive care, regardless of who they are, regardless of where you come from. That's what change is. That happened because of you.Change is the fact that for the first time in our history you don't have to hide who you love to serve the country you love because we ended ""don't ask, don't tell."" It's over.And change is keeping another promise I made in 2008: For the first time in 9 years there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. We've refocused our efforts on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11. And because of our brave men and women, Al Qaida is back on its heels and Usama bin Laden is no more. That's what change is.Now, we've----Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. It's actually 4 1/2... [Laughter]And we've begun to transition in Afghanistan to put Afghans in the lead, bring our troops home.Record investments in clean energy, record investments in education, restoring science to its rightful place--well, none of this has been easy. And everybody here knows we've got a lot more work to do. There are still so many Americans out there that are still looking for work or trying to find a job that pays a little more, too many families who are barely able to pay the bills, homes underwater. We're still recovering from the worst economic crisis in generations.But even on the economic front, over these last 2 years, we've seen businesses add more than 4 million new jobs, manufacturers creating jobs for the first time since the 1990s. The economy is getting stronger. The recovery is accelerating. And the last thing we can afford to do right now is to go back to the same, worn-out, tired, uninspired, don't-work policies that got us into this mess in the first place.But of course, that's exactly what the other side wants to do. They make no bones about it. They don't make--they don't hide the ball. They want to go back to the days when Wall Street could play by its own rules. They've said, we want to roll back all the reforms that were put in place to protect consumers and make sure that we don't end up seeing taxpayer bailouts again. They want to go back to the days when insurance companies could deny you coverage or jack up premiums without reason. They want to spend trillions of dollars more on tax breaks for the very wealthiest of Americans, even if it means adding to the deficit, even if it means gutting things like education or clean energy or Medicare.Their philosophy is simple: If we just let those who have done best keep on doing what they do, and everybody else is struggling to get by, somehow that's going to grow the economy.They're wrong. In the United States of America we are greater together than we are on our own. We are better off when we keep that basic American promise: If you work hard, you can do well enough to raise a family, own a home, send your kids to college, put a little away for retirement.And that's the choice in this election. This is not just your run-of-the-mill political debate. We have not seen a contrast like this in a long time. This is the defining issue of our time, this make-or-break moment for our middle class and all those who are fighting to get into the middle class. And are we going to stand with those folks who have been the backbone of economic growth in this country throughout our history?We could go back to an economy built on outsourcing and bad debt and phony financial profits. Or we can fight for an economy that's built to last, an economy built on American manufacturing and American energy and skills for American workers and the values of everyday Americans of hard work and fair play and shared responsibility.And I know--I know what side I am in that debate. I know what side I'm on in that debate. I think we've got to make sure that the next generation of manufacturing takes root not in Asia, not in Europe, takes root right here in the United States of America, right here in Florida, in Detroit, in Pittsburgh, in Cleveland. I don't want this Nation just to be known for what we buy and consume. I want us to be a nation known for what we produce and invent and sell all around the world. It's time to stop rewarding businesses that are shipping jobs overseas. Let's reward companies that are investing right here in the United States of America.Let's make our schools the envy of the world. And that starts, by the way, with the men and women at the front of the classroom. You know, a good teacher can actually increase the lifetime earnings of a classroom by $250,000. A great teacher can inspire and plant that seed of possibility in a child, no matter how poor they are. And that's why I don't like hearing folks just bashing teachers. I don't want them--I don't believe in just defending the status quo. I want schools to have the resources they need to keep good teachers on the job, reward the best ones, give schools the flexibility to teach with creativity and passion, stop teaching to the test. Give us a chance to train teachers that aren't doing a great job, get rid of those who are--we can create accountability in the system and high standards, but we've got to make sure that we're thinking about our kids first.And when kids do graduate, the most daunting challenge ends up being the cost of college. Americans owe more in tuition debt than credit card debt right now, which means, by the way, Congress needs to stop the student interest--the interest rates on student loans from doubling, which is scheduled to happen in July.And colleges and universities have to do their part. They've got to keep tuition from going up. And State legislatures need to keep their part by supporting higher education. This is not a luxury higher education; it is an economic imperative that every American should be able to afford.An economy built to last is one where we support scientists and researchers that are trying to make the next breakthrough happen right here in the United States in biotech and nanotechnology and clean energy.We've subsidized oil companies for a hundred years. It's time to end the hundred years of taxpayer giveaways for an industry that is plenty profitable, doing just fine, have more than enough incentive to keep on producing. Let's give it to clean energy industries that have never been more promising: solar and wind and biodiesel.Let's rebuild America. I think about what was built in my grandparents' generation: Hoover Dam, Golden Gate Bridge, the Interstate Highway System. We've got to give our businesses the best access to the best roads and the best airports and the fastest railroads, faster Internet access. It's time for us to take some of that money that we spent on war, use half of it to pay down our debt, use the rest of it to do some nation-building here at home. We can put folks back to work right now rebuilding America.[At this point, the lights flickered.]Is there a little light show going on here? [Laughter] It's nice. [Laughter] Sort of a--it's a disco--disco rally. [Laughter] Somebody going to pull the roller skates out now? [Laughter] What's going on here?And finally, we've got to make sure that we've got a tax system that reflects everybody doing their fair share. I just spoke about this earlier today. We have to reduce our deficit. It's a long-term challenge. And we've got to do it in a balanced way. We've made some very tough spending cuts. We're going to have to make some smart choices in terms of health reform. That's what's driving a lot of increased Government spending.We've also got to make sure that revenues are there to pay for the things that are absolutely necessary for us to grow our economy, to maintain a basic safety net for our seniors and folks who are vulnerable.Now, the other side, they've got a different idea. They want to decimate basic Government investments that historically have helped this economy grow and use it to finance tax cuts for the very wealthiest. And I've got a different idea. I say, let's follow what we call the Buffett rule: If you make more than a million dollars a year--I'm not saying you've got a million-dollar nest egg that you accumulated over the course of years saving for your retirement. I'm saying if you make a million dollars a year, then you shouldn't pay a lower tax rate than your secretary. That's common sense. That's not--they may call it class envy or--that's just being fair. And by doing that, that also allows us then to say to folks who are making $250,000 a year or less--like 98 percent of American families--that their taxes don't go up.This is not class warfare. This is not about envy. We want Americans to be wealthy. We want them to be successful. But this is just basic math. Because if somebody like me, who is doing just fine, gets tax breaks I don't need and that the country can't afford, then one of two things is going to happen: either it gets added to our deficit--now, the other side say they care about the deficit; well, these tax cuts add to the deficit--or alternatively, you've got to take it away from somebody else, a student who's trying to pay for their college or a senior trying to get by with Social Security and Medicare or a veteran who needs some care after he or she has served this country with distinction or a family that's just trying to get by. That's not right. That's not who we are.You know, when I hear politicians during an election year talk about values--well, what kind of values does that reflect? Hard work, that's a value. Responsibility, that's a value. Honesty, looking out for one another--I am my brother's keeper, I am my sister's keeper--that's a value. Our budget should reflect those values. Our politics should reflect those values.Everybody here--look at this room, people from every conceivable background, every part of the country--everybody here, you're here because somebody, somewhere felt some responsibility not just for themselves, but for others. It started with your parents, grandparents. Some may have come to this country with nothing but wanted more opportunity for their kids; they worked on behalf of their family. They worked on behalf of their neighborhoods, their community. They worked on behalf of their country. They understood that the American story is not about just what you can do on your own. We're rugged individualists. We expect everybody to carry their own weight. But we also understand that what makes us great is what we can do together.We won't win the race for new jobs and businesses, we won't restore middle class security with the same old you're-on-your-own economics. It doesn't work. It never worked. We tried it before the Great Depression, back in the twenties--didn't work. We tried it in the last decade. We were promised how this was going to unleash all this unbelievable economic growth. And what ended up happening? Sluggish job growth, wages and incomes flatlined for middle class families struggling to get by, and then culminated in the worst financial crisis we've seen since the 1930s. We tried it. Their theories don't work.And most people understand this. They understand there's a different way to think about the economy and this journey we're on together. It says we've got a stake in each other's success. If we attract an outstanding teacher to the profession by paying them properly, by giving them the training they need, the professional development, and that teacher goes on to educate the next Steve Jobs, well, you know what, we all benefit. If we provide faster Internet service to rural America and then suddenly some store owner has access to a global market and they're selling goods and services and growing that business and hiring, that's good for all of us. If we build a bridge that cuts on commuting times and suddenly that shipping company is saving time and money, workers and customers, the whole country does better.And this is not historically a Democratic or Republican idea. It was Republican Teddy Roosevelt who called for a progressive income tax. Dwight Eisenhower, Republican, built the Interstate Highway System. It was, with the help of Republicans in Congress, FDR who gave millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, a chance to get ahead through the GI bill. Abraham Lincoln, first Republican President, helped to bind this country together through the transcontinental railroad, started the land-grant colleges, National Academy of Sciences. This is not just a Democratic idea.And here's the good news: That spirit of common purpose, it still exists all across this country. Maybe not in Washington--[laughter]--but out in America, it's there. It's there when you talk to folks on Main Street, in town halls. It's there when you talk to our unbelievable members of our Armed Forces. It's there when you go to places of worship.Our politics may be divided, but most Americans understand that we're greater together than we are apart, and that no matter where we come from, who we are, we rise or fall as one Nation. That's what's at stake in this election.I know this has been a tough few years for America. We've seen a lot of stuff in these last 3 years, and I know that the change we fought for in 2008, as much as we've gotten done, we've got so much more to do. And there are times when change just doesn't come fast enough. I don't watch some of these cable news shows and all this sniping, but I imagine if you're sitting back, or, lord knows if you live in a swing State and you're watching these negative ads and, at a certain point, you must just step back and sort of say, maybe this change we believed in, maybe it's just not possible. It's tempting to be cynical and say you know what, this just is too hard.So I'm here to remind you, I didn't say it was going to be easy. I told you real change, big change, takes time. These problems didn't build up overnight, and they're not going to be solved overnight. It will take more than a single term, more than a single President. What it takes is ordinary citizens. It takes folks like you who are committed to this larger project of making sure that America is constantly moving closer and closer to its highest ideals.Back in 2008, I used to tell you, I'm not a perfect man, I will never be a perfect President. But I made a promise to everybody. I said, I will always tell you what I think; I'll tell you where I stand. And I told you I would wake up every single day fighting for you as hard as I know how. And I have kept that promise. I've kept that promise.And so if you're willing to stick with me on this thing, if you're willing to keep pushing through the obstacles and knocking on doors and making phone calls and fighting for what is right, if you're willing to work even harder than we did in 2008, we will finish what we started. And we will remind the world just why it is that America is the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"Well, first of all, Denise and Jim, thank you for opening up this incredible home. They have been great friends. When I first met Denise, the fact that I was a Blackhawks fan--[laughter]--was incidental. But she right away lent us her support, and getting to know her has been just an incredible pleasure. And Jim, and your sons, thank you so much for helping to make this evening happen.I want to thank Gerry Acker, I want to thank Barry Goodman for their great work. You've got an outstanding former Governor here, Jim Blanchard.I want to thank Jalen Rose for--even though he did not pick the Bulls to win the Eastern Conference--[laughter]--I'm not sure I agree with his analysis, but he is a wonderful commentator and obviously is a great basketball player. And to have Willie Horton here is a great honor as well.In smaller settings like this, what I love to do is not give a long speech, but just rather say a few things at the top and then just open it up for questions and comments. I just came from the Henry Ford Museum. What a spectacular museum. I had never been there before; it exceeded all expectation. I wanted to just go in there and roam around a bit, but they keep me on a schedule around here. [Laughter]But part of what was remarkable is it captured so much of America's history, what makes this country exceptional, what makes us special. You had the ingenuity and the drive and the imagination of the Wright Brothers and Fords and all the inventors who helped to trigger this incredible economic superpower and to build this remarkable middle class that Michigan represents. And then it also had a range of displays about the long battle for freedom, to make sure that everybody was included in that American Dream. So I actually had the chance to sit in Rosa Parks's bus. I just sat there for a moment and pondered the courage and tenacity that is part of our very recent history, but is also a part of that long line of folks--sometimes nameless, oftentimes didn't make the history books--but who constantly insisted on their dignity, their stake in the American Dream.Now, we've gone through 3 1/2 very tough years, worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. When I came into office we were losing 750,000 jobs per month. Michigan had obviously been going through tough times for a decade or more, with outsourcing and plants closing and layoffs. The auto industry was buckling, on its knees, on the verge of not just conventional bankruptcy, but potentially a liquidation bankruptcy. And I think a lot of people weren't sure whether we were going to dip into a great depression.And 3 1/2 years later, we can look and say to ourselves that, in part because of the support of some of the folks in this room who helped not just propel me into office, but helped to give America a vision of what we could be, GM is now the number-one automaker in the world again, it's experience record profits, Chrysler is the faster growing auto company, is making investments in plants and equipment, and we've seen 200,000 auto workers hired back, back on the job. And that's just part of this steady process of economic healing that's led to 4 million jobs created in the last 2 years, businesses starting to invest again and the financial system stabilized and banks starting to lend again to not just businesses, but small--just like this and small businesses and consumers.And so as we see the economy growing, it gives people some cautious sense of optimism. As I was at that museum, I reminded myself that when I ran for office in 2008, the goal wasn't just to get back to where we were in 2006 or 2005. We had gone through a decade in which job growth was sluggish and incomes and wages flatlined. The goal was to get back to that spirit that was reflected in that museum, where we are building again, and we are creating products that are the envy of the world and creating that sense of opportunity for people, where if they work hard they know that they can support a family, buy a home, send their kids to college, retire with dignity and respect, that sense that everybody, regardless of what they look like or where they come from, what their last name is, that everybody has a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules.And we had a nice big event over at the museum. I told people, sometimes when you look at Washington you may not feel as if that spirit, that can-do spirit--that spirit of not just innovation and possibility, but also that spirit that everybody can take part in it--you might not feel that that's very evident in Washington. Because it just seems like folks in Washington are much more interested in ideological arguments and bickering.But I tell you, as you travel around the country that spirit is still there. It's here in Michigan. It's in Ohio, where I just was. You see it in our men and women in uniform as they're defending our country around the world. You see it in our places of worship. That sense that we rise and fall together and that it makes sense for us to constantly be thinking not just about ourselves, but about others; not just about today, but about the next generation. That spirit is still out there. It's still out there.And we captured that spirit in 2008. We've got to recapture it in 2012. And the stakes could not be higher, because the contrast between the two parties is going to be probably more pronounced in 2012 than it was in 2008. The other side has a very different vision. Yes, they're patriots; they care about the country. But their basic mission seems to be one in which a few folks are doing well at the top and everybody else is struggling to get by, but that's okay, that somehow that is a formula for growth.We've got a different idea: that we believe in the free market, we believe in individual initiative, but we also believe in giving back and investing in schools so that everybody gets the education they need; investing in science and technology so that the great inventions that the marketplace takes advantage of are constantly happening here in the United States in our labs and our universities. We believe in creating the infrastructure that serves as a platform for economic growth. We believe in making sure that the vulnerable among us and our seniors have a basic safety net, because we never know which one of us might at some point be stricken with an illness or suffer a layoff. And most of us in this room have somebody in their background who knows what it's like to fall on hard times and understand how important those safety nets are in order to get people back on their feet so they can succeed.So we've got a lot at stake in this election. The good news is that I think we've got the truth on our side, and I think the values that we're going to be talking about over the next several months are not Democratic values or Republican values, they're American values. And I think people are going to be, once again, choosing a better future and our best traditions. That's what we're going to be fighting for. I'm glad you guys are on the team as I go out there and do that.So thank you very much.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Michigan! How is everybody doing? It is good to be in Dearborn. It is good to be back in the Motor City!A couple of people I want to acknowledge here. First of all, give it up for Jeff. Thank you so much for that outstanding introduction. Thank you, Jeff.We've got Dearborn mayor--John O'Reilly is here; Wayne County Sheriff Benny Napoleon; Wayne County Commissioner Gary Woronchak. Although he is not here, he has done an outstanding job representing this district for longer than just about anybody--John Dingell. And John's wonderful wife Debbie is here. I want to thank Keith William Brown and Gary Bolda from the UAW. And I'm grateful that Cynthia and Edsel Ford II are here. Thank you so much.And I'm glad all of you are here. This is a fantastic museum. I've got to bring the girls back here. I've got to check it out.Audience member. [Inaudible]The President. Look at this guy. I didn't mean to start a dialogue here. [Laughter]Well, listen, I am here not just because I need your help, although I do. I'm here because the country needs your help. I see a lot of folks here who worked tirelessly on my 2008 campaign and, let's face it, you did not do it because you thought this was going to be a cakewalk. When you decide to support a candidate named Barack Hussein Obama, you know the odds are not necessarily in your favor. You didn't need a poll to tell you that wasn't going to be a sure thing. [Laughter]But the point is you didn't get involved in this campaign just because of me. You did it because you were making a commitment to each other. You had a shared vision for America. It wasn't a vision where just a few were doing well and everybody else is left to fend for themselves and play by their own rules. It was a big, bold, generous vision of America where everybody who works hard has a chance to get ahead, not just those at the very top.That's the vision we shared. That's the commitment you made to each other. And we knew it wasn't going to be easy. We knew the changes that we believed in wouldn't necessarily come quickly. But we understood that if we were determined, that we could overcome any obstacle; that we could meet any challenge. And in just 3 years, because of what you did in 2008, we've begun to see what change looks like. We've begun to see it.Think about it. Change is the decision we made to rescue the American auto industry from collapse, when some politicians said let Detroit go bankrupt. There were 1 million jobs on the line, and fate--the fate of communities all across the Midwest was on the line, and we weren't going to let it happen. I placed my bets on American workers. Today, GM is back on top as the number-one automaker in the world. Chrysler is growing faster than any other car company. Ford is investing billions in plants and factories all across America, bringing thousands of jobs home--200,000 new jobs over the last 2 1/2 years. The American auto industry is back. And that happened because of you. That happened because of you.There are folks like Jeff all across the country and all across Michigan, all across Ohio and Indiana, and all across the Midwest. Because you had confidence in America's capacity to change, they were able to show just what they can do.Change is the decision we made to stop waiting for Congress to do something about our oil addiction and finally raise fuel efficiency standards on cars. With the agreement of the auto industry, by the next--by the middle of the next decade, we will be driving American-made cars, better than ever, that get 55 miles to a gallon. That saves the typical family over $8,000 at the pump; helps the environment. That's what change is. That happened because of you.Change is the first bill I signed into law.Audience member. Lilly Ledbetter!The President. Lilly Ledbetter, a law that says women deserve an equal day's pay for an equal day's work. Our daughters should have the same opportunities as our sons.Change is the fight we won to stop handing out over $60 billion in taxpayer giveaways to banks who are managing the student loans--give that money directly to the students. And now you've got millions of students all across America who are benefiting with higher student loans, help--more help. That happened because of you. This young man right here mentioned it when I saw him behind stage.Change is health care reform that we passed after a century of trying. Because of your commitment, here in the United States of America, nobody has to go broke because they get sick. Already 2.5 million young people have health insurance that didn't have it before, because this law lets them stay on their parent's plan. Millions of seniors, now paying less for their prescription drugs. It means Americans can no longer be denied or dropped by their insurance companies when they need care the most. And it means every American will be able to get health care, regardless of who you are, how much money you make. It doesn't matter if you've got a preexisting condition, you will be able to get coverage. That's what change is.Change is the fact that for the first time in history, you don't have to hide who you love in order to serve the country you love, because we ended ""don't ask, don't tell.""Change is the promise we made in 2008: For the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. We have refocused our efforts on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11. Al Qaida is weaker than it's ever been. Thanks to our amazing troops, Usama bin Laden no longer walks the face of this Earth. We have begun to transition out of Afghanistan. That's what change is.None of this change would have happened if it weren't for you. And now we've got more work to do. We've got a lot more work to do. There's still too many Americans here in Michigan and all across the country that are out there looking for work. There's still too many Americans who have a tough time paying the bills or making the mortgage. We're still recovering from the worst economic crisis of our generation.But the good news is, is that over the past 2 years, businesses have added over 4 million new jobs. Our manufacturers are creating jobs for the first time since the 1990s. Now we've got to keep it going. And the last thing we can afford to do is to go back to the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. That's part of what this election is all about.You know we--that's what these other folks who are running for this office want to do. They make no secret about it. They want to roll back Wall Street reforms, so suddenly Wall Street is playing by its own rules again. They want to roll back health insurance reform; go back to the days when insurance companies could jack up your rates or deny you coverage without any reason. They want to spend trillions of dollars more on tax breaks for our wealthiest citizens, even if it means adding to the deficit, even if it means gutting student loan programs and education programs and clean energy, and making Medicare more expensive for seniors.Their philosophy is, is that we're better off if a few are doing well at the top and everybody else is fending for themselves. And they're wrong. I have no doubt they love this country, but they're wrong about this.In the United States of America, we have always been greater together than we are on our own. We're better off when we stick to that notion that if you work hard in this country--no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter what your religious faith, if you work hard--if you believe in this country, you can do well enough to raise a family, own a home, send your kids to college, put a little away for retirement.That idea--that's what's at stake. That's the choice in this election. This is not just another political debate. There's always going to be debating in Washington. I mean, they'll argue about anything. [Laughter] But this--this is real. This is a make-or-break moment for the middle class in this country and all those who are fighting to get into the middle class. Are we going to create those rungs on the ladder to opportunity, so that everybody has a shot?We can go back to an economy that's built on outsourcing and bad debt and phony financial profits. That's what we saw before 2008. Or we can fight for an economy that's built to last, built on American manufacturing and American energy and skills for American workers, and the values that made this country great: hard work, fair play, shared responsibility.You look at these amazing planes in this museum and cars in this museum, and you're reminded, part of what made us great is making stuff. And I want the next generation of manufacturing taking root not in Asia, not in Europe. I want it to happen right here in Detroit, right here in Michigan, in Pittsburgh, in Cleveland, in the United States of America. I don't want us to just be known for buying stuff from other countries: I want to invent and build and sell American products all around the world.I want us to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs overseas. I want to reward companies that are investing here, creating jobs in America. I want us to make sure that we've got the best schools in the world. And that means reform. It means properly funding our schools. It means looking out for the man or woman at the front of the classroom.A good teacher can increase the lifetime earnings of a classroom by over $250,000. A great teacher can offer an escape from poverty for a child who thinks maybe they're bound by their circumstances but suddenly, that teacher helps them to raise their sights. So I don't want us defending the status quo, but I also don't want a bunch of folks in Washington bashing teachers. I want to give schools the resources they need to keep good teachers, to reward the best ones. I want to give schools the flexibility they need to teach with creativity and passion and stop teaching to the test and train teachers properly.And those who can't make it, we understand they shouldn't be in the classroom. We want accountability, but we also want to make sure that we understand how important teaching is. Nothing is more important.And when kids do graduate from high school, we've got to make college affordable. Americans already owe more tuition debt than credit card debt. That's one of the reasons Congress has to stop interest rates on student loans, which are scheduled to go up in July, if we don't do anything.Audience members. Boo!The President. Yes, that's not good. And then, colleges and universities have to do their part by keeping tuition from going up. And State legislatures have to step up and make sure that they're providing the support to higher education that's necessary. Higher education cannot be a luxury. Whether it's a 2-year program at a community college or a 4-year program or a postdoctorate program, it is not a luxury. It is an economic imperative. Every American family should be able to afford getting the skills they need to compete in this global economy. And that's what we're fighting for.We need to be supporting scientists and researchers who are trying to make the next breakthrough in clean energy or biotech. I want clean energy to happen here in the United States. I want advanced batteries made here in the United States. I want electric cars made here in the United States. I want solar and wind power made here in the United States. We've been subsidizing oil companies with taxpayer giveaways for about 100 years now. It's time for us to double down on clean energy that has never been more promising.And we need to build in America--roads, bridges, ports, airports, broadband lines--that's what this museum reminds us of, is what it means to build. It's time we stop taking the money that we're spending at war--use half of it to pay down our debt, use the other half to do some nation building here at home. And when we talk about the deficit----Audience member. We love you, Obama!The President. I love you, baby. [Laughter] Thank you.Audience member. We love you more! [Laughter]The President. When we talk about the deficit, it's a real problem. It is something that we're going to have to address. We can't leave a bunch of unpaid bills for our kids and our grandkids. And so that means that we've got to make some tough decisions, get rid of programs that don't work to make that we can invest in programs that do. But we've also got to make sure that the tax system reflects everybody doing their fair share.The Republicans in the Senate just rejected the Buffett rule; wouldn't let it come up for a vote. Simple idea that if you make more than a million dollars a year, you shouldn't pay a lower tax rate than your secretary. Now, the reason that's important is because if we abided by that rule, then we could say to folks what I have repeatedly said, which is, the 98 percent of Americans who make $250,000 a year or less, your taxes shouldn't go up. And that idea is not--it's not class warfare to say that somebody like me can afford to do a little bit more. It's just basic math.If I get a tax break that I don't need and the country can't afford, then one of two things has to happen. Either it adds to the deficit because it's not paid for; that's what they've been doing. Or somebody else is going to have to shoulder the burden: a student who has to pay a higher rate on their student loan, a senior who has got to pay higher for their Medicare, a veteran who doesn't get the help that they need to deal with the aftermath of having fought for our freedoms, a family that's trying to get by. That's not right. That's not who we are.And when I hear politicians talk about values, I agree: This campaign is, and should be, about values. Hard work, that's a value. Looking out for one another, that's a value. The idea that I am my brother's keeper, I am my sister's keeper, that's a value. That I have a commitment to something larger than myself.Each of us is here--every one of us is here because somebody, somewhere----Audience member. Made a sacrifice.The President. ----made a sacrifice, was looking out for us. It starts with the family, but it extends beyond the family. You think about what--this museum was built because the Ford family and others said, you know what, this is important to the community that gave us so much. Our grandparents, our great-grandparents, immigrants, slaves--think about all the sacrifices they made not just to think about themselves, but to think about the country. Think about all our men and women in uniform making sacrifices because they believe that we are all in this together.The American story has never been about just what we do on our own. We don't win the race for new jobs and new businesses and security and growth if it's just a you're-on-your-own economics. It doesn't work. And it's never worked. And we've tried it. We just finished trying it. Between 2000 and 2008, we tried what they're selling. It didn't work. Most sluggish job growth that we've seen, outsourcing, manufacturing deteriorating, and then it culminates in the worst crisis since the Great Depression. Why would we think that it would work now? [Laughter] Why would we want to go back to that?We've all got a stake in each other's success. When an outstanding teacher is attracted to the profession, given the pay that she deserves, and then that teacher goes on to teach some talented kid, maybe of modest means, and that kid goes on to become the next Steve Jobs, we all benefit. If we provide faster Internet service and then it goes to a rural community and suddenly some small business has the chance to market to the world and is hiring more workers, that benefits everybody's bottom line. That benefits the entire economy. We build a new bridge that saves the shipping company time and money. You think about the research that led to the invention of the Internet and how much wealth has been created, but that came out of our collective efforts. We all invested in that. That's how we grow.This is not a Democratic idea or a Republican idea. This is an American idea. It was Teddy Roosevelt, a Republican, who called for a progressive income tax and Dwight Eisenhower, a Republican, who built the Interstate Highway System so all these outstanding cars from Michigan could have somewhere to go. It was a Republican in Congress that helped FDR give millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, a chance to go to college under the GI bill. This is an American idea.And you know that spirit still exists today. Maybe not in Washington, but out in the country, you go on Main Streets and town halls and VFW halls, you talk to the members of our Armed Forces, you go to our places of worship.Our politics is divided, but most Americans, they still understand we're in this together. No matter where we come from, no matter what we look like, no matter what our last names are, we rise or fall as one Nation and as one people. And that's what's at stake right now. That's what this election is all about.So let me just say, Michigan, I know these last 3 1/2 years, 4 years, have been tough. I know there are times where we think change isn't happening as fast as we'd like. But--and I know that there's a tendency sometimes--and look at Washington and just say, you know what, it's easier being cynical. It's easier just--it's tempting to just say, maybe this isn't possible. But remember what we said during the last campaign. I said this was going to be hard. Change takes time. Sometimes it takes more than a year, it takes more than a single term. It takes more than a single President.As I was walking in here, you've got a display of Abraham Lincoln, and then you've got the bus that Rosa Parks sat down in. It takes ordinary citizens to bring about change, who are committed to keep fighting and keep pushing and keep inching this country closer to our highest ideals.That's why I need all of you. I need all of you. I said in 2008, I am not a perfect man, I will never be a perfect President. But what I promised you was that I would always tell you what I thought, I would always tell you where I stood, and I would wake up every single day fighting for you as hard as I know how. And I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise.And if you're willing to keep pushing with me, to keep working on behalf of our higher ideals, there is nothing that will stop us. And we will finish what we started in 2008.God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"Hello, everybody. Thank you. How's everybody doing? Good. Good afternoon. I want to thank my point guard Barbara for that wonderful introduction and for all the battles you have waged on behalf of America's women and America's families. And I want to thank all of you for being here today, for all the time and energy that you've been giving to our campaign. Everybody, feel free to sit. Just relax. I've got a few things to say. [Laughter]It is always a pleasure to be surrounded by so many talented, accomplished women. It makes me feel right at home. [Laughter] Although, at least here I get a microphone--[laughter]--which levels the playing field a little bit. Bo and I, we try at dinner to try to get a word in.Now, whether you have joined this cause in its earliest days or in recent months, I know you didn't join it just because of me. You did it because of the vision that we share for this country. It's not a vision of a country where a shrinking number of people do really well while a growing number barely get by. It's a vision for an America where everybody who works hard has the chance to get ahead, where everybody has a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody plays by the same set of rules. That's the America we know and love. That's the America within our reach.And right now no issue is more important than restoring economic security for all of our families. Today, our economy is recovering, but not yet recovered, from the worst crisis since the Great Depression. Our businesses have added more than 4 million jobs over the past 2 years. But too many Americans are still looking for a job that pays enough to cover the bills or the mortgage. Too many families are still searching for the middle class security that started slipping away years before the recession hit.So we've got a lot of work to do. We've got to finish what we started. And I'm so grateful to have all of you in the Women's Leadership Forum on our team.It's fair to say that there's been a bit of talk about women and women's issues so far this year. And I've said before, I want to repeat, I think it's been oversimplified. Women are not an interest group. Women shouldn't be treated that way. Women are half this country and half of its workforce. You're 80 percent of my household, if you count my mother-in-law, and I always count my mother-in-law. [Laughter]So I've got a vested interest in making sure women do well. And I'm proud of what we've done on behalf of women across this country. I know you've heard a lot about that today. But I want you to know why we've done what we've done because there are values behind the policies.And it begins, for me at least, with the women that have shaped my life. As some of you know, I grew up the son of a single mom who struggled to put herself through school and make ends meet, even relying on food stamps at one point to help us get by. But she earned her education, earned her Ph.D., started traveling around the world, helping women enter into the economy and make a little bit of money and gain a little bit of independence.Through scholarships and hard work, she had the opportunity to give back. And she made sure that my sister and I were able to have those same opportunities. She used to wake me up before dawn to study, because we were living overseas for a time and she wanted to make sure I stayed up with my American schooling. I'd complain, and she'd let loose with, ""This is no picnic for me either, buster."" [Laughter] Because she had to go to work after she taught me lessons, and that's part of the reason why my sister Maya chose to become a teacher, seeing that example.And when my mom needed help with us, my grandparents stepped up. And my grandmother, in particular, who had a high school education, worked during World War II on a bomber assembly line like Rosie the Riveter. And she didn't get a GI bill--unlike today's post-9/11 GI bill, it couldn't be transferred to family members--so she got jobs, and eventually, she got a job at a local bank.And she worked hard and eventually made vice president, starting off as a secretary. And I'm convinced she could have been the best president that bank had ever seen, if she had gotten that chance. But she hit the glass ceiling like too many women in that generation did, and for the rest of her career, she'd watch men that she had once trained pass her by up that ladder. I think about her.And then there's Michelle. Earlier this week, I visited a few colleges across the country as part of a battle to keep student loan rates from going up. And I spent some time on our own story, about how when Michelle and I got married, we both had loads of student debt from college and law school. So, when we teamed up together, we got poorer together. [Laughter]We only finished paying off those loans about 8 years ago. And I bring this up because what I really want to point out is that every time I mentioned Michelle, the students cheered more loudly than they did for me. [Laughter] This is what happens.But once Michelle and I had our girls, we gave it our all to balance raising a family and chasing a career. And it was tough on me, but let's face it, it was tougher on her. I was gone a lot. I know that when she was with the girls, she'd feel guilty that she wasn't giving enough time to work. And when she was at work, she'd feel guilty about not having enough time for the girls. And like many of you, I'm sure we both wished there was--there were a machine that would let us be in two places at once.And then today, I think about these issues as a father, because the highlight of every day for me is asking my daughters about theirs. Their hopes and their futures, that's what drives me every single day when I step into the White House. Every decision I make is all about ensuring that all of our daughters and all of our sons grow up in a country that gives them the equal chance to be anything they set their minds to, a country where more doors are open to them than were open to us.Those stories are what inform my work. Those women are what inspire me to do what I do. That's at the heart of everything that we've done. That's the lens through which I view all of this. And that's what we mean when we say that these issues are more than just a matter of policy, they're personal. They're not just women's issues, they're economic issues. They're family issues. They're America's issues. They impact all of us.When women make less than men for the same work, that hurts families who have to get by with less and businesses who have fewer customers who can spend money there. When a job doesn't offer family leave to care for a new baby or sick leave to care for an ailing parent, that burdens all of us. It's not just a women's issue. When an insurance plan denies women coverage because of a preexisting condition, that puts a strain on emergency rooms and drives up the cost of care for everybody; it strains family budgets across America. When any of our citizens can't fulfill their potential because of factors that had nothing to do with talent or character or work ethic, that diminishes us as a country. It says something about who we are as Americans. So when we started off with this administration, we were under no illusions that changing these things would be easy. We knew it wouldn't come quickly. But think about what's happened in 3 years, in large part because of you and the support that you've provided. We've started to see what change looks like.It's been mentioned: Change is the first bill I signed into law, a law that says women deserve an equal day's pay for an equal day's work. A law that says our daughters should have the same opportunities as our sons. A law named for a courageous woman, Lilly Ledbetter, my dear friend, who is right here today. That's what change is, and it happened because of you.Change is extending more than 16,000 new loans to women-owned businesses, cutting small-business taxes more than 18--17 times so that more women have the power to create new jobs and opportunity.Change is education reform that does more to encourage young women to join fields like science and technology and engineering and math and increasing grants that have helped about 2.3 million more young women afford to go to college.And yes, Barbara is absolutely right. Change is the health care reform we passed after a century of trying that finally gives women more power to make their own choices about their health care.Last year, more than 20 million women received expanded access to preventive services like mammograms and cervical cancer screening at no additional cost. Nearly 2 million women enrolled in Medicare received a 50-percent discount on the medicine that they needed. Over 1 million more young women are insured because they can now stay on their parent's plan.Soon, insurance companies will no longer be able to deny coverage based on preexisting conditions like breast cancer or charge women more just because they're women. And this year, women will receive new access to recommended preventive care like domestic violence screening and contraception at no additional cost. That's going to be happening.This contraception fight in particular was illuminating. It was like being in a time machine. [Laughter] Republicans in Congress were going so far as to say an employer should be able to have a say in the health care decisions of its female employees. And I'm always puzzled by this. This is a party that says it prides itself on being rabidly antiregulation. These are folks who claim to believe in freedom from government interference and meddling. But it doesn't seem to bother them when it comes to women's health.Now we've got Governors and legislatures across the river in Virginia, up the road in Pennsylvania, all across the country, saying that women can't be trusted to make your own decisions. They're pushing and passing bills forcing women to get ultrasounds, even if they don't want one. If you don't like it, the Governor of Pennsylvania said you can ""close your eyes."" It's a quote.It's appalling. It's offensive. It's out of touch. And when it comes to what's going on out there, you're not going to close your eyes. Women across America aren't closing their eyes. As long as I'm President, I won't either. The days of male politicians controlling the health care decisions of our wives and our mothers and our daughters and our sisters that needs to come to an end.And none of these fights have been easy. We've got to wage more fights and win them on these issues and many more. We've got more jobs to create, more students to educate, more clean energy to generate, more troops to bring home, more doors of opportunity to open for all our kids. The one thing we can't do--the one thing we can't afford to do right now is to go back to the very same policies that got us into this mess.Of course, that's exactly what the other side has planned. And they make no secret about it. They want to go back to the days when Wall Street played by its own rules. They want to go back to the days when insurance companies could deny coverage or jack up premiums without a reason. A lot of them seem like they want to turn back the clock to the fifties or the forties or the thirties or maybe further back than that and close doors of opportunity that we thought we'd kicked open a long time ago, doors of opportunity to people who haven't made it quite yet.Just look at some of the debates that we've already had this year. Instead of putting forward serious plans to help more Americans back to work, a lot of those folks in the other party have chosen to refight battles we settled long ago.And I've heard some of them say, look, this is all just a big misunderstanding; they need to get their message out better when it comes to women. I don't think that's the problem. I think they're getting their message out just fine. We don't need to read between the lines in terms of what they're saying.When folks talk about killing the health care reform that we passed, part of what they're saying is, is that women should pay more than men for the same health care coverage. They're saying we should stop protecting women with preexisting conditions. They're saying we should no longer let that 25-year-old daughter and more than a million other young women stay on their parents' health care plans.When you talk about how marvelous your party's economic plan is, when you break down the numbers, what you're really saying is you want to pass massive new tax cuts for millionaires and billionaires, pay for them by gutting programs that, among other things, support low-income women and children and pregnant mothers and student aid for--that disproportionately helps young women.When you say we should get rid of Planned Parenthood, you're not just talking about restricting a woman's ability to make her own health care decisions, you're talking about denying the preventive care like cancer screenings that millions of women rely on.And when something like the Violence Against Women Act is actually up for debate, then we know something has gone haywire. That's something that should be beyond politics. This is a bill that my Vice President coauthored when he was in the Senate. It's a bill that once passed by wide bipartisan margins. And it is a bill that we are going to renew. It is the right thing to do.So the choice between going backward and moving forward has never been so clear. And as long as I'm President, we're going to keep moving forward. You can count on that. You don't have to take my word for it; you've got my signature on it. Because something like standing up for equal pay for equal work isn't something I've got to ""get back to you on,"" it's the first law that I signed.Progress is hard. Change can be slow. Opportunity, equality of opportunity, they don't come without a fight. And sometimes you got to fight to keep what you got.But we know these things are possible. We know that because for the first time in history, young girls across the country can see three women sitting on the bench of the highest court in the land.We know change is possible because they can read about the incredible leadership of a woman who went by the title Madam Speaker. They can turn on the news and see that one of the most formidable Presidential candidates ever is now doing as much as anyone to improve America's standing abroad as one of the best Secretary of States we've ever known.These things are possible because earlier generations of Americans did their part to open up new doors of opportunity. And now it's our turn to open up these doors even wider. And what I want to say to all of you is if you're willing to keep pushing through all those obstacles with me, if you're willing to keep reaching for that vision of America that you hold in your hearts--that we hold in our hearts--change will come.If you're willing to work even harder in this election than in the last one, I promise you we'll finish what we started in 2008. If you're willing to stick with me and fight with me and press on with me, I promise you we will remind everybody just why it is that America is still the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"Thank you. Everybody, please have a seat. It is wonderful to see you here, to be here. And I want to thank Debra for opening up this beautiful home on a lovely day and to then invite some of my best friends over to hang out. [Laughter]A couple of other people I just want to mention very briefly. First of all, as somebody who is working tirelessly on our behalf each and every day, and we're so proud of her, our DNC chair, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, is here, accompanied by the adorable Shelby. Yay! And I want to say thank you to Jane Stetson, who has been such a dear friend, and is now chairing--cochairing our finance committee and doing just extraordinary work each and every day.Typically, in these more intimate gatherings, what I like to do is to just make a few comments at the top and then make this a conversation. So we'll open it up, and you guys can ask questions, make comments, give me advice. I always get advice. [Laughter]But obviously, we've gone through 3 1/2 of the toughest years that this country has seen in my lifetime and most of yours: the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, the worst economic crisis worldwide since the 1930s. The month I took office, we lost 750,000 jobs. The U.S. auto industry, the iconic industry that had helped to create our middle class, was on the verge of liquidation--at least two of the three of the Big Three auto firms.We were in the midst of two wars. And I think there had been decades of issues that had been put off and put off--whether it was health care or energy or education--and a sense that somehow we could not get done what needed to get done to ensure that middle class families regained a sense of security, so that if they worked hard and they acted responsibly, that they'd be able to afford a home and send their kids to college and retire with dignity and respect. That sense that we would be passing on a future for our children that was greater than ours.That's what propelled me to run. And after 3 1/2 years, we're nowhere near where we need to be yet. But think about the extraordinary progress that we've been able to make.Over the last 3 months alone, 600,000 jobs created, 4 million jobs created over the last 2 years. We've been able to save an auto industry where GM is now the number-one automaker again in the world, saved probably a million jobs throughout the Midwest. Chrysler is back. And our auto industry is actually making better cars, cars that are being sold all around the world. Doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars, so that not only are we helping to save the planet, but we're saving people at the pump and helping to reduce our dependence on foreign oil so that it's below 50 percent for the first time in 13 years.Passing health care reform that provides 30 million people, for the first time, the opportunity to get health insurance that didn't have it before. And it makes young people--it makes it possible for young people to stay on their parents' health insurance; 2.5 million young people already taking advantage of that. Preventive care, including mammograms and cervical cancer screenings for women, contraceptive care.And not only is it helping families, but it's also help the country as a whole, because over time, what we're building into is a health care system that's going to be more efficient and provide better quality. And by the way, just yesterday or today Kaiser released a study showing that there's going to be over a billion dollars of rebates going out to millions of families all across America because of this law.So whether it's what we've done on education with Race to the Top and helping to initiate school reform in more than 40 States; whether it's what we've done on clean energy--doubling the amount of energy that's coming from wind and solar and helping to build from scratch essentially an advanced battery industry that will be the future of automation--or the automotive industry for the future; whether it's the work that we've done not just to end the war in Iraq, but also to start transitioning our troops out of Afghanistan so that they can take greater responsibility in restoring that sense of respect for America around the world--on all these fronts, we've made enormous progress.But we've got a lot more to do. I won't be satisfied until everybody can find a job that pays a living wage and allows them either to stay in the middle class, but also creates those ladders of opportunity into the middle class.I'm not going to be satisfied until we once again have the best education system in the world and college is affordable for young people all across the country.I'm not going to be satisfied not just with getting our troops home from Afghanistan, but making sure--as we talked about today down in Fort Stewart--that every single one of our veterans have the capacity to rebuild this country the same way my grandfather had and his generation had the capacity to rebuild the country when they came back from World War II.So we've got a lot more work to do. And here's the good news. I think that when you look at the issues, when you look at where people stand in terms of making sure that everybody is getting a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same set of rules; when you look at how they feel about Wall Street reform or health care reform and break it down specifically--not, sort of, just the rhetoric that goes on out there, but do you believe that young people should be able to stay on their parents' health care plans, do you believe that seniors should be able to afford prescription drugs and get bigger discounts, do you believe that we should prevent reckless behavior on Wall Street, do you believe that we should have an all-of-the-above energy strategy--when you break down the issues, then people are on our side. They believe what we believe.But understandably, things are tough, and they've grown cynical, and they see the mess that goes on in Washington and there's a temptation at a certain point to just say, oh, a plague on both their houses, nothing is getting done.And so we're going to have to work harder this time than we did in '08. I always say, back in '08, I wasn't as gray, and it was kind of cool being an Obama supporter. [Laughter] And now I'm the President. [Laughter] I'm just saying--[laughter]--now we see the guy all the time, and he's kind of dinged up.But I want you to know, my commitment, my sense of determination is undiminished. My confidence in the American people is undiminished. My hunger, my desire to help every one of those folks out there that is trying hard to carve out a life for themselves and their families, that hunger is undiminished.So I'm going to work harder than I did--I--2008, and if you guys are willing to join me, then we're going to have 4 more years to be able to finish what we started. All right?Thank you. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you so much. It's always good to be in Virginia.To Dorothy, most of all--[laughter]--but also to this guy here, Terry--[laughter]--I want to thank the McAuliffe family for this incredible hospitality. Jack, we could not be prouder of you. You look sharp in whites, man. [Laughter] And to the whole family, it is a--I'm sure Terry and Dorothy feel the way Michelle and I feel about Malia and Sasha and the way Bill feels about--Bill and Hillary feel about Chelsea. There's nothing we do that's more important than raising our kids. And when we see outstanding young people like this, it gives us a lot of satisfaction.A couple of other people I want to mention. It was already noted that the next U.S. Senator from the Commonwealth of Virginia, Tim Kaine, is here. I love Tim Kaine. One of the finest men I know and just a great friend and was a great Governor here, obviously.You also have an outstanding Congressman in Jim Moran in the house. And I need to acknowledge--because some of you know I am a former State senator, so I never pass up the chance to introduce State senators--Barbara Favola is here, and this is her district, and we love State senators. Where's Barbara? She's over there somewhere. Good to see you, Barbara.Well, you guys get two Presidents for one out of this event--[laughter]--which is a pretty good deal. [Laughter] And I was--as I was listening to President Clinton speaking, I was just thinking about the remarkable record that he was able to create during his Presidency and his singular capacity to be able to explain very difficult concepts in very understandable terms to the American people. A master communicator. But more importantly than his communication skills was, Bill Clinton understood at a time when, let's face it, the Democratic Party was a little bit lost, he understood what it meant to refocus not on ideology, not on abstractions, but focus on where people live, what they're going through day to day.And early in our party in such a way that we were thinking about what has always been the central promise of America, the idea that if you work hard, if you play by the rules, if you're responsible, then you can live out that basic American promise: the idea that you can find a job that pays a decent living and buy a home and send your kids to school and not have to worry, if you get sick, that you might go bankrupt, and retire with dignity and respect.And everything he did, all the years that he was in office, was designed to give people the tools to help fulfill that promise. And he did so to a remarkable degree. Terry mentioned the record.And ever since that time, because of Bill Clinton's leadership, I think that when you look at the Democratic Party and what we've stood for, it has been squarely at the center of how the American people think and what they believe and is entirely consistent with some of our best traditions and our deepest values.Now, as has been mentioned, when I came into office, obviously, we were experiencing the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. The month I was sworn into office we lost 750,000 jobs, as I was taking the oath. We had lost 4 million jobs the 6 months prior, and we would lose another several million jobs before economic policies had a chance to take effect.So a lot of what we've done over the last 3 1/2 years has been designed just to right the ship to respond to crises: to make sure that Detroit didn't go under, to make sure that the banking system was no longer locked up, to make sure that small businesses could get loans and consumers could buy a home again or buy a car again, making sure that the system did not break down. And that took enormous amounts of energy and some pretty tough and difficult political decisions.But I didn't run for President simply to get back to where we were in 2007. I didn't run for President simply to restore the status quo before the financial crisis. I ran for President because we had lost our way since Bill Clinton was done being President. And for almost a decade, what we had seen for ordinary families was a betrayal of that basic promise, that core American idea.The economy in fits and starts grew between 2000 and 2008, but wages and incomes flatlined. Corporations were profitable, but ordinary people felt like they were working harder and harder just to get by. That sense of middle class security and the notion that successive generations would do better than the previous one, that felt like it was slipping away for too many people. That's why I ran for President in 2008, to restore that basic promise.And that's why over the last 3 1/2 years, in addition to dealing with immediate crises, what we've tried to do is make sure that we were finally dealing with some of those issues that had been put off and put off and put off, so that once again we could build an economy with a firm foundation, an economy built to last, an economy that would deliver for ordinary Americans, regardless of where they came from, what they looked like, what their last names were, that idea that you could make it here if you try.And that's why we took on issues like health care reform, because as President Clinton said, the single most important thing to liberate our businesses, to make sure workers are getting raises, and to free ourselves from crippling debt both at the Federal level and at the State level was if we started having a more sensible health care system that provided better quality for lower cost.And what we've been able to do as a consequence--if you look right now--2.5 million young people able to get health insurance because they're staying on their parent's plan; millions of seniors getting discounts on their prescription drugs that they weren't getting before; people being able to get preventive care, the best kind of care, instead of having to go to the emergency room; 30 million people who are going to be able to get health care who didn't have it before; people not having to worry if they've got a preexisting condition. And now we're seeing rebates all across the country, over a billion dollars in rebates to consumers, even as health care costs overall are going down.On education, not only did we make college more affordable, taken $60 billion that was going to banks as middlemen in the student loan program, and we were able to cut out the middleman and send that money directly to young people so that now millions more young people are either eligible for Pell grants or getting higher Pell grants than they were before and are able to access a college education. We put in place a $10,000 tax credit for young people--or for their parents. [Laughter] I know you guys are sympathetic. [Laughter]But we also started focusing on K-12 and how we're going to not just--[applause]--how we're going to get past this debate about reform or more money and say we need money and reform and let's reform those districts and those States and those schools that are doing the right thing and retaining outstanding teachers and developing them. And let's stop just teaching to the test. Let's make sure that teachers can teach with creativity and passion, but let's hold them accountable. And so with the help of Arne Duncan and the Secretary of Education, we are on track. Over 40 States now have adopted unprecedented reforms that are going to help us win the 21st century.We refocused on manufacturing. And everybody has noted the fact that we helped to save Detroit, but here's the good news. Detroit is building better cars. [Laughter] Cars that folks want to drive. We're going to be getting 55 miles per gallon by the middle of the next decade, which will save the average driver $8,000 at the pump. And that's part of the reason why, actually, we are now consuming--less than 50 percent of our energy is imported, less than 50 percent of our oil is important. So there is an economic benefit; there is a security benefit.But not only have we helped Detroit produce better cars, we've also created entire new industries. Advanced battery manufacturing: The key to electric cars is going to be who wins the race to make the best battery. And when we came into office, it looked like maybe 2 percent of the market was going to go to U.S. companies. Now it looks like it's going to be 40 percent, because of what we did. We are going to be winning the race for clean energy all across the board.So whether it's our investments in clean energy, whether it's our reform of education, whether it's our reform of the health care system, whether it's making sure that Wall Street is operating by the same rules so we don't go through the same cycle that we did before, whether it's creating a Consumer Finance Protection Bureau that ensures people that aren't getting cheated in their financial transactions--what we've done is not just deal with crisis, but also try to play the long game and try to think what are the strategies, what are the investments that are going to help us grow over the long term, and what do we need to do to make sure that everybody gets a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules.Now, I joke sometimes with my staff, a lot of what we've done, a lot of what President Clinton did, there was a time when Republicans thought these were pretty good ideas. [Laughter] No, that's the truth. [Laughter] I mean, you can go back to the first Republican President, who comes from my home State, a guy named Abraham Lincoln, who built the first--helped to create the transcontinental railroad system and in the midst of civil war started the land-grant colleges and the National Academy of Sciences, understood the need to make investments in the future. That was not a foreign idea to the Republican Party.There's Teddy Roosevelt, who thought it was a good idea to have a progressive income tax because he understood that the market works best--Teddy Roosevelt was no Socialist--[laughter]--but what he understood was, is that if you've got basic rules of the road in place and you've got equity in the tax system, then everybody can compete and people win based on the best ideas, not who they can prevent from competing. And you create platforms in which everybody can succeed. That was part of Republican ideas.As recently as when President Clinton was President, when he tried to tackle health care, he had partners in the United States Senate and in the House on the Republican side who said, you know what, this is an idea that has to be tackled. We may not agree with you on every detail, but we understand that we can't keep on spending 18 percent of our GDP on health care and leave 30, 40 million people uninsured. That doesn't make sense.And it used to be a guy like a Bob Dole or a Howard Baker, if they wanted to--you know, they were conservative, fiscal hawks--the idea was we were going to balance a budget, and they sure didn't like tax increases, but they understood if we're making cuts in spending, then we also need to pay for the kind of Government we want. And we're going to do a balanced approach to how we bring down deficits.These were not just Democratic ideas, these were American ideas. And part of what's happened--[applause]--so part of what's happened is we now have a Republican Party that's unrecognizable. I've said this, and I meant it: Ronald Reagan could not get through a Republican primary in this election cycle--[laughter]--could not get through it. Here's a guy who raised taxes. That in and of itself would have rendered him unelectable in a Republican primary.So I want to, when you're talking to your friends and your neighbors--I know everybody here knows some Republicans. [Laughter] You might be married to some, might have a mom and dad and whoever. [Laughter] And describe for them what it is that's at stake in this election.When you've got a House Republican budget that would, on top of the Bush tax cuts for the wealthy, initiate an additional $4 trillion or $5 trillion in tax cuts that would be paid for by decimating everything that Bill Clinton talked about, everything that Terry McAuliffe talked about, everything I've been talking about, so that the nondefense side of the budget, other than Social Security would amount to less than 1 percent; historically, it's never been under 8 percent, even under Republican Presidents. And they're talking about taking this, everything--education, infrastructure, food safety, environmental protection, national parks, whatever it is that you conceive of as part of what we do together because we can't do it on our own--that would be reduced to less than 1 percent of the budget. It would basically be wiped out. That's not my opinion, that's what they're proposing.And so it is impossible--taking their budget, taking their philosophy, taking their approach--to imagine how we compete with China on something like clean energy. It's impossible to imagine us being able to rebuild our roads, our bridges, our ports, our broadband lines. It's impossible for us to imagine being able to educate our kids effectively and to produce the number of engineers that we're going to need, the number of scientists we're going to need, the number of mathematicians that we're going to need.So every election, Presidents will--or candidates will say this is the election that--this is a crossroads, this is the biggest election in history. [Laughter] I'm sure back in 1988, 1989, every--you say this is--[laughter]--we need a bridge to the 21st century and all that. [Laughter] Every election is the most important election in our history. [Laughter]But let me tell you: This one matters. [Applause] This one matters. [Applause] This one matters.And that's before we start talking about foreign policy. Hillary and I, we've spent the last 3 1/2 years cleaning up after other folks' messes. And by the way, we've got them--we're starting to get them pretty cleaned up. The war in Iraq is over. We're transitioning in Afghanistan. We've got the strongest allies we've ever seen. And Al Qaida is on the ropes. So we've done what we said we'd do.But when you've got the leading contender, the presumptive nominee, on the other side suddenly saying our number-one enemy isn't Al Qaida, it's Russia--[laughter]. I don't make that up. [Laughter] I'm suddenly thinking, what--maybe I didn't check the calendar this morning. [Laughter] I didn't know we were back in 1975. [Laughter]That's before I start talking about social issues that are at stake. You know something about that in Virginia, the kinds of nonsense that's been going on. But that's all across the country. When you have folks who talk about--want to repeal ""don't ask""--repeal the repeal of ""don't ask, don't tell."" [Laughter] When you have folks who are talking about not just constraining women's reproductive health, but questioning things like contraception as part of our preventive care.That's before I start talking about the fact that there are going to be some Supreme Court appointments probably, if you look actuarially, for the next President. There's so much at stake here.So let me just close by saying this. I've overstayed my welcome. Dorothy is saying, golly, I'm trying to get these people out of this house. My lawn is all messed up. [Laughter]Let me just say this, and I think Bill will agree with me. There's nothing more humbling, actually, than being President. It's a strange thing. Suddenly, you've got all the pomp and the circumstance, and you've got the helicopters, and you've got the Air Force One and--and the plane is really nice. [Laughter] It really is. I mean, Bill may not miss being President, but he misses that plane. [Laughter] Let's face it, he does. It's a great plane. And I'll miss it too. [Laughter]Audience member. But not yet!The President. But not yet. [Laughter]But the reason it's humbling is because you wake up every morning and you know there are folks out there still hurting, especially in what we've been going through over the last 4 years. Yes, you get letters, or you talk to folks, and they've lost their job, or they've lost their home, or they thought they were going to retire, and suddenly, they realize they can't. Or it's a young person who has figured out, you know what, I've got to see if I can find work to help my family, even though I was planning to go to college. And every day, you know that there's just some portion of the country that are good and decent and working really hard and they're still having a tough time. And you want to just be able to help each one of those people, one by one, because they're deserving of it, because they represent what's best in America. And you know that at the end of the day, no matter how hard you work, there's still going to be some stuff left undone. And you also know that you're going to make mistakes and there are going to be times where your team makes mistakes. And so your mind doesn't rest, because you're constantly thinking, what else do I need to be doing?But I'll tell you two things that keep me going. The first is--and I'm sure President Clinton agrees with this--you get no better vantage point of how wonderful the American people are than when you're President of the United States. And as you're traveling around the country, the resilience and the strength and the core decency of the American people inspire you. And you say to yourself, you know what, no matter what we're going through right now, we're going to be okay. We're going to figure this out, because that's who we are and that's what we do. No matter how times--how tough times are, in fact, maybe especially when times are tough, we full together and we figure it out.And the other thing that gets you through is--or at least gets me through is--I said back in 2008, I'm not a perfect man, and I will not be a perfect President; Michelle will confirm that. [Laughter] But I made a promise that I'd always tell people what I thought, I'd always tell people where I stood, and I'd always wake up every single day working as hard as I could on behalf of you. And that promise, I can say, I've kept. And I can look in the mirror and say that I've kept that promise.And so if you're willing to join us and finish what we started in 2008 and continue what Bill Clinton was doing when he was President of the United States, and if you are willing to share that vision of what America can be, I guarantee you we won't just win this election, we're going to make sure that we remind this world of ours just why it is America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Ohio! It is good to be back in Ohio! Right before I came out, somebody happened to give me a buckeye for good luck.Audience member. I love you!The President. I love you back! Now, before I begin, I want to say thank you to a few people who are joining us here today. Your mayor, Michael Coleman, is here. Former Governor Ted Strickland is here. Senator Sherrod Brown is in the house. An American hero, John Glenn is with us.And I want to thank so many of our neighborhood team leaders for being here today. You guys will be the backbone of this campaign. And I want the rest of you to join a team or become a leader yourself, because we are going to win this thing the old-fashioned way: door by door, block by block, neighborhood by neighborhood.Ohio, 4 years ago, you and I began a journey together. I didn't run, and you didn't work your hearts out, just to win an election. We came together to reclaim the basic bargain that built the largest middle class and the most prosperous nation on Earth.We came together because we believe that in America, your success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth. If you're willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job. If you're willing to meet your responsibilities, you should be able to own a home, maybe start a business, give your children the chance to do even better, no matter who you are or where you come from or what you look like or what your last name is.We believe the free market is one of the greatest forces for progress in human history, that businesses are the engine of growth, that risk takers and innovators should be rewarded. But we also believe that at its best, the free market has never been a license to take whatever you want, however you can get it, that alongside our entrepreneurial spirit and our rugged individualism, America only prospers when we meet our obligations to one another and to future generations.We came together in 2008 because our country had strayed from these basic values. A record surplus was squandered on tax cuts for people who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. Two wars were being waged on a credit card. Wall Street speculators reaped huge profits by making bets with other people's money. Manufacturing left our shores. A shrinking number of Americans did fantastically well, while most people struggled with falling incomes, rising costs, the slowest job growth in half a century.It was a house of cards that collapsed in the most destructive crisis since the Great Depression. In the last 6 months of 2008, even as we were campaigning, nearly 3 million of our neighbors lost their jobs. Over 800,000 more were lost in the month I took office alone.It was tough. But I tell you what, Ohio, the American people are tougher. All across this country, people like you dug in. Some of you retrained. Some of you went back to school. Small-business owners cut back on expenses, but did everything they could to keep their employees. Yes, there were setbacks. Yes, there were disappointments. But we didn't quit. We don't quit. Together, we're fighting our way back.When some wanted to let Detroit go bankrupt, we made a bet on American workers, on the ingenuity of American companies. And today, our auto industry is back on top of the world. Manufacturers started investing again, adding jobs for the first time since the 1990s. Businesses got back to the basics, exports surged. And over 4 million jobs were created in the last 2 years, more than 1 million of those in the last 6 months alone. Are we satisfied?Audience members. No!The President. Of course not. Too many of our friends and family are still out there looking for work. The housing market is still weak, deficits are still too high, States are still laying off teachers, first-responders. This crisis took years to develop, and the economy is still facing headwinds. And it will take sustained, persistent effort--yours and mine--for America to fully recover. That's the truth. We all know it.But we are making progress. And now we face a choice. Now we face a choice, Ohio.Audience member. We love you, Barack Obama!Audience members. Aww!The President. [Laughter] Thank you. Now we face a choice. For the last few years, the Republicans who run this Congress have insisted that we go right back to the policies that created this mess. But to borrow a line from our friend Bill Clinton, now their agenda is on steroids. This time, they want even bigger tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. This time, they want even deeper cuts to things like education and Medicare and research and technology.This time, they want to give banks and insurance companies even more power to do as they please. And now, after a long and spirited primary, Republicans in Congress have found a nominee for President who has promised to rubber stamp this agenda if he gets the chance.Ohio, I tell you what: We cannot give him that chance. Not now. Not with so much at stake. This is not just another election. This is a make-or-break moment for the middle class, and we've been through too much to turn back now.We have come too far to abandon the change we fought for these past few years. We have to move forward to the future we imagined in 2008, where everyone gets a fair shot and everyone does their fair share and everyone plays by the same rules. That's the choice in this election, and that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States.Governor Romney is a patriotic American who has raised a wonderful family, and he has much to be proud of. He's run a large financial firm, and he's run a State. But I think he has drawn the wrong lessons from those experiences. He sincerely believes that if CEOs and wealthy investors like him make money, the rest of us will automatically prosper as well.When a woman in Iowa shared the story of her financial struggles, he responded with economic theory. He told her, ""Our productivity equals our income."" Well, let me tell you something. The problem with our economy isn't that the American people aren't productive enough; you've been working harder than ever. The challenge we face right now--the challenge we've faced for over a decade--is that harder work hasn't led to higher incomes. It's that bigger profits haven't led to better jobs.Governor Romney doesn't seem to get that. He doesn't seem to understand that maximizing profits by whatever means necessary--whether through layoffs or outsourcing or tax avoidance or union-busting--might not always be good for the average American or for the American economy.Why else would he want to spend trillions more on tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans? Why else would he propose cutting his own taxes while raising them on 18 million working families? Why else would he want to slash the investments that have always helped the economy grow, but at the same time, stop regulating the reckless behavior on Wall Street that helped the economy crash?Somehow, he and his friends in Congress think that the same bad ideas will lead to a different result. Or they're just hoping you won't remember what happened the last time we tried it their way.Well, Ohio, I'm here to say that we were there, we remember, and we are not going back. We are moving this country forward.Look, we want businesses to succeed. We want entrepreneurs and investors rewarded when they take risks, when they create jobs and grow our economy. But the true measure of our prosperity is more than just a running tally of every balance sheet and quarterly profit report. I don't care how many ways you try to explain it: Corporations aren't people. People are people.We measure prosperity not just by our total GDP, not just by how many billionaires we produce, but how well the typical family is doing, whether they can go as far as their dreams and hard work will take them.And we understand that in this country, people succeed when they have a chance to get a decent education and learn new skills, and by the way, so do the businesses that hire them or the companies that they start.We know that our economy grows when we support research into medical breakthroughs and new technologies that lead to the next Internet app or lifesaving drug.We know that our country is stronger when we can count on affordable health insurance and Medicare and Social Security, when we protect our kids from toxic dumping and mercury pollution, when there are rules to make sure we aren't taken advantage of by credit card companies and mortgage lenders and financial institutions. And we know these rules aren't just good for seniors or kids or consumers; they're good for business too. They're part of what makes the market work.Look, we don't expect government to solve all our problems, and it shouldn't try. I learned from my mom that no education policy can take the place of a parent's love and affection. As a young man, I worked with a group of Catholic churches who taught me that no poverty program can make as much of a difference as the kindness and commitment of a caring soul. Not every regulation is smart. Not every tax dollar is spent wisely. Not every person can be helped who refuses to help themselves.But that's not an excuse to tell the vast majority of responsible, hard-working Americans, ""You're on your own,"" that unless you're lucky enough to have parents who can lend you money, you may not be able to go to college; that even if you pay your premiums every month, you're out of luck if an insurance company decides to drop your coverage when you need it most.That's not how we built America. That's not who we are. We built this country together. [Applause] We built this country together.We built railroads and highways, the Hoover Dam, the Golden Gate Bridge together. We sent my grandfather's generation to college on the GI bill together. We instituted a minimum wage and worker safety laws together. Together, we touched the surface of the Moon, unlocked the mystery of the atom, connected the world through our own science and imagination. We did these things together, not because they benefited any particular individual or group, but because they made us all richer. Because they gave us all opportunity. Because they moved us forward together, as one people, as one Nation.That's the true lesson of our past, Ohio. That's the right vision for our future. And that's why I'm running for President.I'm running to make sure that by the end of the decade, more of our citizens hold a college degree than any other nation on Earth. I want to help our schools hire and reward the best teachers, especially in math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses are looking for right now. In the 21st century, higher education can't be a luxury. It is an economic imperative that every American should be able to afford. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President.I'm running to make sure the next generation of high-tech manufacturing takes root in places like Columbus and Cleveland and Pittsburgh and Richmond. I want to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs and profits overseas and start rewarding companies that create jobs right here in the United States of America. That's the choice in this election.I'm running so that we can keep moving towards a future where we control our own energy. Our dependence on foreign oil is at its lowest point in 16 years. By the middle of the next decade, our cars will average nearly 55 miles per gallon. Thousands of Americans have jobs right now because the production of renewal energy in this country has nearly doubled in just 3 years.So now is not the time to cut these investments to pay for another $4 billion giveaway to the oil companies. Now is the time to end the subsidies for an industry that's rarely been more profitable. Let's double down on a clean energy future that's never been more promising--for our economy and for our security and for the safety of our planet. That's why I'm running for President. That's the choice in this election, Ohio.For the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. Usama bin Laden is no longer a threat to this country. Al Qaida is on the path to defeat. And by 2014, the war in Afghanistan will be over.America is safer and more respected because of the courage and selflessness of the United States Armed Forces. And as long as I'm Commander in Chief, this country will care for our veterans and serve our veterans as well as they've served us. Because nobody who fights for this country should have to fight for a job or a roof over their heads when they come home.My opponent said it was ""tragic"" to end the war in Iraq. He said he won't set a timeline for ending the war in Afghanistan. I have, and I intend to keep it. After a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives and over a trillion dollars, the Nation we need to build is our own. I will use half of what we're no longer spending on war to pay down the deficit and the other half to repair our roads and our bridges, our runways, and our wireless networks. That's the choice in this election, to rebuild America.I'm running to pay down our debt in a way that's balanced and responsible. After inheriting a trillion-dollar deficit, I signed $2 trillion of spending cuts into law. And now I want to finish the job by streamlining Government and cutting more waste and reforming our Tax Code so that it is simpler and fairer and asks the wealthiest Americans to pay a little bit more.My opponent won't tell us how he'd pay for his new, $5 trillion tax cut, a tax cut that gives an average of $250,000 to every millionaire in this country. But we know the bill for that tax cut will either be passed on to our children or it will be paid for by a whole lot of ordinary Americans. That's what we know. And I refuse to let that happen again.I refuse to pay for another millionaire's tax cut by eliminating medical research projects into things like cancer and Alzheimer's disease. I refuse to pay for another tax cut by kicking children off of Head Start programs or asking students to pay more for college or eliminating health insurance for millions of poor and elderly and disabled Americans on Medicaid.And as long as I'm President of the United States, I will never allow Medicare to be turned into a voucher that would end the program as we know it. We will not go back to the days when our citizens spent their golden years at the mercy of private insurance companies. We will reform Medicare, not by shifting the cost of care to seniors, but by reducing the spending that isn't making people healthier. That's what's at stake in this election. That's what's at stake, Ohio.On issue after issue, we can't afford to spend the next 4 years going backward. America doesn't need to refight the battles we just had over Wall Street reform and health care reform. On health care reform, here is what I know: Allowing 2.5 million young people to stay on their parent's health insurance plan, that was the right thing to do. Cutting prescription drug costs for seniors, that was the right thing to do. I will not go back to the days when insurance companies had unchecked power to cancel your policy or deny your coverage or charge women differently from men. We're not going back there. We're going forward.We don't need another political fight about ending a woman's right to choose or getting rid of Planned Parenthood or taking away access to affordable birth control. I want women to control their own health choices, just like I want my daughters to have the same opportunities as your sons. We are not turning back the clock. We are moving forward.We're not returning to the days when you could be kicked out of the United States military just because of who you are or who you love. That would be wrong for our national security, and it would be a betrayal of our values.This should be the last election where multimillion-dollar donations speak louder than the voices of ordinary citizens. We need more checks on lobbyists and special interests, not less. We're not going to eliminate the EPA. We're not going to roll back the bargaining rights that generations of workers fought for. It's time to stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they're the children of undocumented immigrants. This country is at its best when we harness the God-given talents of every individual, when we hear every voice, when we come together as one American family, striving for the same dream.That's what we're fighting for. That's what we're fighting for, Ohio: a bold America, a competitive America, a generous America, a forward-looking America, where everybody has a chance to make of their life what they will. That's what made us the envy of the world. That's what makes us great. That's why I'm running again for President of the United States.And that is why I need your help. Ohio, this election will be even closer than the last. Too many of our friends, too many of our neighbors are still hurting because of this crisis. I've heard from too many people wondering why they haven't been able to get one of the jobs that have been created, why their home is still under water, why their family hasn't yet been touched by the recovery.The other side won't be offering these Americans a real answer to these questions. They won't offer a better vision or a new set of ideas. But they will be spending more money than we've ever seen before on negative ads--on TV, on radio, in the mail, on the Internet--ads that exploit people's frustrations for my opponent's political gain. Over and over again, they'll tell you that America is down and out, and they'll tell you who to blame and ask if you're better off than you were before the worst crisis in our lifetime.We've seen that play before. But you know what? The real question--the question that will actually make a difference in your life and in the lives of your children--is not just about how we're doing today. It's about how we'll be doing tomorrow.Will we better off if more Americans get a better education? That's the question. Will we better off if we depend less on foreign oil and more on our own ingenuity? That's the question. Will we better off if we start doing some nation-building right here at home? That's the question. Will we be better off if we bring down our deficit without gutting the very things we need to grow? When we look back 4 years from now or 10 years from now or 20 years from now, won't we be better off if we have the courage to keep moving forward?That's the question in this election. [Applause] That's the question in this election. And the outcome is entirely up to you. Now, sure, we'll have to contend with even more negative ads, with even more cynicism and nastiness and sometimes just plain foolishness. There will be more of that than we saw in the last campaign.But if there is one thing that we learned in 2008, it's that nothing is more powerful than millions of voices calling for change. When enough of you knock on doors, when you pick up phones, when you talk to your friends, when you decide that it's time for change to happen, guess what? Change happens. Change comes to America.And that's the spirit we need again. If people ask you what this campaign is about, you tell them it's still about hope. You tell them it's still about change. You tell them it's still about ordinary people who believe that in the face of great odds, we can make a difference in the life of this country.Because I still believe, Ohio. I still believe that we are not as divided as our politics suggest. I still believe that we have more in common than the pundits tell us, that we're not Democrats or Republicans, but Americans first and foremost. I still believe in you, and I'm asking you to keep believing in me. I told you in 2008 that I wasn't a perfect man, and I would never be a perfect President. But I promised that I would always tell you what I thought. I would always tell you where I stood. And I would wake up every single day fighting for you as hard as I know how.And I have that kept that promise. I have kept that promise, Ohio. And I will keep it so long as I have the honor of being your President. So if you're willing to stick with me, if you're willing to fight with me and press on with me, if you're willing to work even harder in this election than you did in the last election, I guarantee you, we will move this country forward.We will finish what we started. We are still fired up. We are still ready to go. And we are going to remind the world once more just why it is that the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Virginia! What do you think about Michelle Obama? I hate following her, she is too good. And she looked good too, didn't she? Yes, she does. I'm just saying, she looked pretty good. How's it going, VCU?Well, before I begin, there are a few people that I want to thank for joining us here today. First of all, your mayor Dwight Jones is here. Representative Bobby Scott is in the house. Your former Governor Tim Kaine is here. And a guy that, I gather, is pretty popular in these parts, Coach Shaka Smart is in the house. When I saw Coach backstage, he said, ""I just want you to know, we're going to be coming to the White House just like that Kentucky team came this week."" And he wasn't smiling. [Laughter]I also want to thank so many of our neighborhood team leaders for being here today. You guys will be the backbone of this campaign. And I want the rest of you to join a team or become a leader yourself, because we are going to win this thing door by door, block by block, neighborhood by neighborhood.Audience member. We love you, Barack!The President. I love you back. Love Virginia. Virginia, 4 years ago, you and I began a journey together. I didn't run, and you did not work your hearts out, just to win an election. We came together to reclaim the basic bargain that built the largest middle class and the most prosperous nation on Earth.We came together because we believe that in America, your success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth. If you're willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job. If you're willing to meet your responsibilities, you should be able to own a home, maybe start a business, give your kids the chance to do even better, no matter who you are, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter what your last name is.We believe the free market is one of the greatest forces for progress in human history, that businesses are the engine of growth, and that risk takers and innovators should be rewarded. But we also believe that at its best, the free market has never been a license to take whatever you want, however you can get it. We've understood that alongside our entrepreneurial spirit, our rugged individualism, America only prospers when we meet our obligations to one another and to future generations.We came together in 2008 because our country had strayed from these basic American values. A record surplus was squandered on tax cuts for people who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. Two wars were being waged on a credit card. Wall Street speculators reaped huge profits by making bets with other people's money. Manufacturing left our shores. A shrinking number of Americans did fantastically well, while most people struggled with falling incomes and rising costs and the slowest job growth in half a century.And in 2008, that house of cards collapsed in the most destructive crisis since the Great Depression. In the last 6 months of that year, even as we campaigned, nearly 3 million of our neighbors lost their jobs. Over 800,000 more were lost in the month I took the oath of office. And it was tough. It was tough here in Virginia. It was tough all across the country.But the American people are tougher. All across America, people like you dug in. Folks like you fought back. Some of you retrained. Some of you went back to school. Small-business owners cut back on expenses, but did everything they could to keep their employees. And sure, there were setbacks. There have been disappointments. But we didn't quit. We don't quit. Together, we are fighting our way back. [Applause] Together, we're fighting our way back.When some wanted to let Detroit go bankrupt, we made a bet on American workers, on the ingenuity of American companies. And today, our auto industry is back on top of the world. Manufacturers started investing in America again, adding jobs for the first time since the 1990s. Businesses got back to basics, exports surged, and over 4 million jobs were created in the last 2 years, more than 1 million of those in the last 6 months alone. Now, does this make us satisfied?Audience members. No!The President. Of course not. Too many of our friends and family are still looking for work. The housing market is still weak, deficits are still too high. States are still laying off teachers and first-responders. This crisis took years to develop, and the economy is still facing a bunch of headwinds. So it's going to take sustained, persistent effort--yours and mine--for America to fully recover, for us to be where we need to be. That's the truth. We all know it.But, Virginia, I'm here to tell you we are making progress. And now we face a choice. For the last few years, the Republicans who run this Congress have insisted that we go right back to the policies that created this mess in the first place.But it gets worse, because to borrow a line from our friend Bill Clinton, now their agenda is on steroids. This time, they want even bigger tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. This time, they want even deeper cuts to things like education and Medicare and research and technology. This time, they want to give banks and insurance companies even more power to do as they please.And now, after a long and spirited primary, Republicans in Congress have found a champion. They have found a nominee for President who has promised to rubberstamp this agenda if he gets a chance. But, Virginia, I tell you what, we can't give him the chance. Not now. Not with so much at stake. This isn't just another election. This is a make-or-break moment for America's middle class. We've been through much to turn back now. We've come too far to abandon the change we fought for these past few years. Virginia, we've got to move forward to the future that we imagined in 2008. We've got to move forward to that future where everyone gets a fair shot and everyone does their fair share and everyone plays by the same rules. That's the choice in this election. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America.Now, Governor Romney is a patriotic American. He's raised a wonderful family, and he has much to be proud of. He's run a large financial firm, and he's run a State. But I think he's drawn the wrong lessons from these experiences. He sincerely believes that if CEOs and wealthy investors like him make money, the rest of us will automatically prosper as well.When a woman in Iowa shared the story of her financial struggles, he responded with economic theory. He told her, ""Our productivity equals our income."" Well, let me tell you something, Virginia, the problem with our economy is not that the American people aren't productive enough; you've never been working harder in your lives. You're working harder than ever. The challenge we face right now--the challenge we've faced for over a decade--is that harder work hasn't led to higher incomes. It's that bigger profits haven't led to better jobs.And Governor Romney doesn't seem to get that. He doesn't seem to understand that maximizing profits by whatever means necessary--whether through layoffs or outsourcing or tax avoidance or union-busting--might not always be good for the average American or for our economy.I mean, why else would he want to spend trillions more on tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans? Why else would he propose cutting his own taxes while raising them on 18 million working families? Why else would he want to slash the investments that have always helped the economy grow, while at the same time stopping regulations of the reckless behavior on Wall Street that helped make the economy crash?Somehow, he and his friends in Congress think that the same bad ideas will lead to a different result. Or they're just hoping that you won't remember what happened the last time we tried it their way. Virginia, I'm here to say that we were there, we remember, and we're not going back. We're moving this country forward. We remember.Look, we want businesses to succeed. We want entrepreneurs and investors rewarded when they take risks, when they create jobs and grow our economy. But the true measure of our prosperity is more than just a running tally of every balance sheet and quarterly profit report. I don't care how many ways you try to explain it: Corporations aren't people. People are people. We measure prosperity not just by our total GDP, not just by how many billionaires we produce, but how well is the typical family doing, whether they can go as far as their dreams and hard work will take them.We understand that in this country, people succeed when they have the chance to get a decent education and learn new skills. And by the way, so do the businesses that hire those people or the companies that those people start.We know that our economy grows when we support research into medical breakthroughs and new technologies that lead to the next Internet app or lifesaving drug.We know that our country is stronger when we can count on affordable health care and Medicare and Social Security, when we protect our kids from toxic dumping and mercury pollution, when there are rules to make sure we aren't taken advantage of by credit card companies or mortgage lenders or financial institutions. These rules aren't just good for seniors or kids or consumers. They're good for business. They're good for the marketplace. They're good for America. Look, we don't expect Government to solve all our problems, and it shouldn't try. I learned from my mom that no education policy can take the place of a parent's love and attention and sometimes getting in your face and telling you what you need to do. As a young man, I worked with a group of Catholic churches who taught me that no poverty program can make as much difference as the kindness and commitment of a caring soul. Not every regulation is smart. Not every tax dollar is spent wisely. Not every person can be helped who refuses to help themselves.That's what we believe. People have to make an effort. People have to try hard. But that's not an excuse to tell the vast majority of responsible, hard-working Americans, ""You're on your own,"" that unless you're lucky enough to have parents who can lend you the money, you may not be able to go to college; that even if you pay your premiums every month, you're out of luck if an insurance company decides to drop your coverage when you need it most.That's not how we built America. That's not who we are. We built this country together. We built railroads and highways, the Hoover Dam, the Golden Gate Bridge together. We sent my grandfather's generation to college on the GI bill together. We instituted a minimum wage and worker safety laws together. Together, we touched the surface of the Moon, unlocked the mystery of the atom, connected the world through our own science and our own imaginations. We did these things not because they benefited any particular group or individual, but because they made us all richer, because they gave us all opportunity, because they moved us forward together, as one Nation, as one people.That's the lesson of our past. That's the right vision for our future. And that's why I'm running for President of the United States of America. I'm running to make sure that by the end of this decade, more of our citizens hold college degrees than any other nation on Earth. I want to help our schools hire and reward the best teachers, especially in math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses are looking for right now. Because in the 21st century, a higher education can't be a luxury; it's an economic imperative that every American should be able to afford. And that's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President.I'm running to make sure the next generation of high-tech manufacturing takes root in places like Richmond and Columbus and Cleveland and Pittsburgh. I want to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs and profits overseas. I want us to reward companies that create jobs right here in the United States of America. That's the choice in this election.I'm running so that we keep moving towards a future where we control our own energy. Our dependence on foreign oil is at its lowest point in 16 years. By the middle of the next decade, our cars will average nearly 55 miles per gallon. That will save you money. Thousands of Americans have jobs because the production of renewable energy in this country--solar, wind, biofuels--it's nearly doubled in just 3 years.So now is not the time to cut these investments to pay for another $4 billion giveaway to the oil companies. Now is the time to end the subsidies for an industry that has rarely been more profitable. Let's double down on a clean energy future that's never been more promising for our economy and our security and for the safety of our planet. That's why I'm running, Virginia. That's the choice in this election.For the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. Usama bin Laden is no longer a threat to this country. Al Qaida is on the path to defeat. And by 2014, the war in Afghanistan will be over. America is safer and more respected because of the courage and selflessness of the United States Armed Forces, a lot of them from Virginia. A lot of folks right here in Virginia, putting on that uniform, serving on our behalf. And as long as I'm Commander in Chief, this country will care for our veterans and serve our veterans as well as they've served us, because nobody who serves, nobody who fights for this country should have to fight for a job or a roof over their heads when they come back home.My opponent has different ideas. My opponent has a different view. He said it was--and I quote--""tragic"" to end the war in Iraq. He said he won't set a timeline for ending the war in Afghanistan.Well, I have, and I intend to keep to that timeline. After a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives and over a trillion dollars, the nation we need to build is right here, right here at home. So we're going to use half of what we're no longer spending on war to pay down the deficit, and we will use the other half to repair our roads and our bridges and our airports and our wireless networks. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President.I am running to pay down our debt in a way that's balanced and responsible. We inherited a trillion-dollar deficit. The other side doesn't like to be reminded of this. But that's okay. I signed $2 trillion of spending cuts into law. And now I want to finish the job by streamlining Government and cutting more waste and reforming our Tax Code so that it's simpler and that it's fairer and that it asks the wealthiest Americans to pay a little bit more.Now, my opponent has a different view. He won't tell us how he'd pay for his new, $5 trillion tax cut--$5 trillion--a tax cut that gives an average of $250,000 to every millionaire in the country. But even if he won't disclose the details of how he's going to pay for it, we know the bill for that tax cut will either be passed on to our children or it will be paid for by a whole lot of you, a whole lot of ordinary Americans.And, Virginia, I refuse to let that happen again. I refuse to let that happen again. I refuse to pay for another millionaire's tax cut by eliminating medical research projects on things like cancer and Alzheimer's. I refuse to pay for another tax cut by kicking children off of the Head Start program or asking students to pay more for college or eliminating health insurance for millions of poor and elderly and disabled Americans on Medicaid. We're not going to do that.As long as I'm President of the United States, I will never allow Medicare to be turned into a voucher that would end the program as we know it. We're not going to go back to the days when our citizens spent their golden years at the mercy of private insurance companies. We will reform Medicare, not by shifting the cost of care to seniors, but by reducing the spending that isn't making people healthier. That's the right way to do it. And that's what's at stake, Virginia. On issue after issue, we just can't afford to spend the next 4 years going backwards.America doesn't need to refight the battles we just had over Wall Street reform and health care reform. And by the way, on health care reform, here's what I know: Allowing 2.5 million young people to stay on their parents' health insurance, that was the right thing to do. Cutting prescription drug costs for seniors, that was the right thing to do. We're not going back to the days when insurance companies had unchecked power to cancel your policy or deny you coverage or charge women differently than men. We're not going back to that.We certainly don't need another political fight about ending a woman's right to choose or getting rid of Planned Parenthood or taking away access to affordable birth control. I want women to control their own health choices, just like I want my daughters to have the same opportunities as your son. We're not turning back the clock.We're not returning to the days when you could be kicked out of the United States military just because of who you are and who you love. We're not going back to that. That would be wrong for our national security. It would be a betrayal of our values. It's not going to happen on my watch.This should be the last election where multimillion-dollar donations speak louder than the voices of ordinary citizens. We need more checks on special interests and lobbyists, not fewer checks on them.We're not going to eliminate the EPA. We're not going to roll back the bargaining rights of generations of workers. And it's time to stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they're the children of undocumented workers. This country is at its best when we harness the God-given talents of every individual, when we hear every voice, when we come together as one American family, striving for that same dream.That's what we're fighting for: a bold America, a competitive America, a forward-looking America, where everybody has the chance to make of their life what they will. That's what made us the envy of the world. That's what makes us great. That's why I'm running again for President of the United States.And, Virginia, that's why I need your help. This election will be even closer than the last. Too many of our friends and neighbors are still hurting because of this crisis. I've heard from too many people wondering why they haven't been able to get one of the jobs that have been created, why their home is still underwater, why their family hasn't yet been touched by the recovery.The other side won't be offering these Americans any real answers to those questions. They won't be offering a better vision. They won't be offering new ideas. But what they will do is spend more money than we've ever seen before, all on negative ads--on TV and radio, in the mail, on the Internet, probably tweeting a few negative ads out there somewhere--ads that exploit people's frustration for my opponent's political gain. And over and over again, they will tell you that America is down and out, and they'll tell you who to blame.And they'll ask if you're better off than you were before the worst crisis of our lifetime. We've seen the play before. We know what to expect. But you know what, the real question--the question that will actually make a difference in your life and in the lives of your children--is not just about how we're doing today, it's about how we'll be doing tomorrow.Will we be better off if more Americans get a better education? Will we better off if we depend less on foreign oil and more on our own ingenuity? Will we be better off if we start doing some nation-building at home? Will we be better off if we bring down our deficits in a balanced, responsible way without gutting the very things that we need to grow? When we look back 4 years from now or 10 years from now or 20 years from now, won't we be better off if we have the courage to keep moving forward?That's the question in this election. And that outcome is entirely up to you. We're going to have to contend with even more negative ads, with even more cynicism, more nastiness, sometimes just plain foolishness. It will be worse than we saw in the last campaign. We know because we've seen some of the foolishness over the last 3 1/2 years.But if there's one thing we learned in 2008, it's that nothing is more powerful than millions of voices calling for change. When enough of you knock on doors and enough of you pick up the phone, when enough of you are talking to your friends and your coworkers, when you decide that it's time for change to happen, guess what? Change happens. Change comes to America.Virginia, that's the spirit we need again. If people ask you what's this campaign about, you tell them it's still about hope. You tell them it's still about change. You tell them it's still about ordinary people who believe in the face of great odds that we can make a difference in the life of this country. You tell them.Because I still believe, Virginia. I still believe that we're not as divided as our politics suggest. I still believe we still have more in common than the pundits tell us, that we're not Democrats or Republicans first, but we are Americans first and foremost.I still believe in you, and I'm asking you to keep believing in me. I told you in 2008 that I wasn't a perfect man, and I will never be a perfect President. But I promised you then that I would always tell you what I thought. I would always tell you where I stood. And I would wake up every single day fighting for you as hard as I know how.And I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise. And I will keep it so long as I have the honor to be your President. So if you're willing to stick with me and fight with me and press on with me, if you're willing to work even harder in this election than in the last election, I guarantee you, we will move this country forward. We will finish what we started. We're still fired up. We're still ready to go. And we're going to remind the world once more why it is that the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you. God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you, everybody. Please, everybody have a seat. What a extraordinary evening. It is wonderful to be with all of you.A couple of people I want to acknowledge: First of all, your outstanding mayor, Antonio Villaraigosa, is in the house. Where's Antonio? Right here. Also the Congressman of this district, somebody who knows foreign policy as well as anybody in Congress and who has just shown extraordinary leadership on so many issues, Congressman Howard Berman is here.I want to thank Jeffrey not just for this evening, but for his tenacious support and advocacy since we started back in 2007. He has just consistently been there for me through thick and through thin. Sometimes, the 2008 campaign gets romanticized, and everybody says how perfect it was, and I have to remind them, no, I was there. [Laughter] And the only person I don't have to remind is Jeffrey, because he was there through all the ups and downs. And occasionally, he would call and say, ""Barack, I don't think things are working the way they're supposed to."" [Laughter] But no matter where we were and what phase we were in, in that campaign, he stuck with us. And over the last 3 1/2 years, he's remained just an extraordinary friend.So, Jeffrey, thank you for everything you've done.And then I want to thank Clooney for letting us use his basketball court. [Laughter] This guy has been talking smack about his basketball game--[laughter]--ever since I've known him. And we've actually known each other a while. It was wonderful, walking through the house, and the famous ""Hope"" poster from the 2008 campaign--people don't realize that the photograph of me is actually me sitting next to George. Because George had come into DC to advocate on behalf of Darfur and to make sure that we were doing the right thing for so many people who were going through such horrific events, and we struck up a friendship. And this is the first time that George Clooney has ever been photoshopped out of a picture. [Laughter] Never happened before. [Laughter] Never happened before, will never happen again. [Laughter]But the wonderful thing is the artist actually sent George--some of you have seen this--a print with my picture and his picture right next to each other with the same--in the same format. Why he said at the bottom, ""Dope and Hope,"" I don't know. [Laughter] I don't think that's fair. That's not fair. [Laughter] That's not right. It ain't right. [Laughter]But look, I cannot take credit for this. Jeffrey can take some credit. But let's face it, we raised a lot of money because everybody loves George. [Laughter] They like me; they love him. [Laughter] And rightfully so. Not only is he an unbelievable actor, but he is one of those rare individuals who is at ease with everybody, seems to just occupy a constant state of grace, and uses his extraordinary talents on behalf of stuff that's really important. And he takes time to actually figure out the facts and the issues. And so we couldn't be prouder, George. Thank you. And I couldn't be prouder of him as a friend.I see a lot of familiar faces in the audience, and I'm going to be joining each of you at your table, so I'm not going to take a long time to talk up here.As Jeffrey said, we've gone through 3 1/2 extraordinary years, as tough as anything that we've experienced in our lifetimes. It turns out, though, the American people are tougher. So yes, we lost almost 8 million jobs during the crisis in 2007, 2008, 4 million before I took office, 800,000 the day I was sworn in--or the month that I was sworn in. The auto industry was brought to its knees, the banking system locked up, even as we were still in the midst of two wars and extraordinary terrorist threats from abroad.And yet, despite all this, the American people are pulling through. And one of the great privileges of being President is you travel around the country and everyday there's an affirmation of how decent and how strong and how caring the American people are. They're not always paying attention to the babble in Washington. They don't have the time to read big briefing books on the latest ideas for Medicare reform. But they have good instincts about what's right and what's true. And it's those instincts and it's that resilience that really has enabled this country to weather an extraordinary storm.And I've had the great privilege of seeing people in communities all across the country pull together, keep businesses open so that they don't have to lay off their employees, folks who are out of work supporting each other in places of worship and in community centers, raising their kids, making sure that they're getting off to a good start.And as a consequence, we're now at a place where we've created 4 million jobs in the last 2 years, 800,000 in the last 6 months--or few months alone, almost a million actually in the last 6 months. GM is the number-one automaker in the world, and not only that, but they're actually making good cars and that people are buying. The banking system has worked through a lot of these issues, and slowly, things are coming back.But as Jeffrey said, we still have so much work to do. There's still so many people out there who are hurting, too many folks who are looking for work, too many people whose homes are underwater, too many communities that aren't sure about the future, that are anxious. Even if they're doing okay, they're anxious about whether the future is going to be better for their kids and for their grandkids.And so I always remind people that in 2008, I did not just run to get back to where we were in 2007. The crisis in a lot of ways was a manifestation of what had been going on for a decade or more: a sense in which a few of us were doing really well, but that that fundamental American promise that if you worked hard, no matter what you looked like, where you came from, what your last name was, who you loved, that you could make it if you tried; that everybody had a fair shot and everybody did their fair share and everybody played by the same rules. Those basic values had been dissipating for a decade or more. And so that's the reason why over the last 3 1/2 years, even as we've managed crisis, even as we've ended a war and are in the process of ending another one, even as we went after Al Qaida and have decimated the ranks of their leadership, even as we got the auto industry back to a place where it can now compete internationally and we unlocked the financial system so that businesses and families could get financing again--even as we did all those things, we kept our eye on the basic promise of our 2008 campaign.That's why we worked on health care reform, not because it was popular, but because it was right. And as a consequence, 30 million people will have health insurance that didn't have it before. That's why we did Wall Street reform, not because it was easy or popular, but because it was right, because we can't have a system in which the recklessness of a few can bring down an entire economy.That's why we have taken on education, sometimes offending folks in our own party because the status quo of some communities where half the kids are dropping out and only 1 out of 10 are reading at grade level. We can't compete doing that.That's why we've doubled clean energy. That's why we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars. That's why we've invested in science and research. That's why projects all across the country have been built, putting construction workers back to work. All of this has been in pursuit of the goal that we originally talked about in 2008, and that was creating an America where everybody had a shot, where we create a platform where if you are willing to work hard, you can make it.And that requires us to do things together. And we're not finished. We've got a lot more work. And as we look forward towards this next campaign, the choice between the path that I've set for this country and that of my opponent could not be starker, and the stakes couldn't be higher. And I won't run through the differences in all the issues. What it comes down to is they have a different vision about how America works.See, I think we work best when we're all in it together, when we've all got a stake in each other. And I've said this before: I believe that--Malia and Sasha are the most magical girls in the world. I don't worry about them. But I think their lives will be better if every child in America has opportunity and a good education and can go to college without worrying about being loaded up with tens of thousands of dollars' worth of debt. That will be a stronger America for them.And Michelle and I--people have commented on the fact that I've got gray hair now. There was a blog post about look how wrinkly Obama is getting. [Laughter] It was sort of distressing. [Laughter] George doesn't have to go through these things. [Laughter]Actor George T. Clooney. Look at me!The President. I like that in you, brother. [Laughter]But Michelle and I will be okay after this is all done. But our lives are better if, when I'm walking down the street and I see some elderly couple holding hands and they're walking through a park, I know, you know what, they've got Medicare that they can count on and they've got Social Security that they can count on. They're going to be able to pay the bills and enjoy their retirement.I remind people when folks talk about the free market, you won't find a bigger advocate for the free market than me, but I also understand the free market works when we've got rules so that folks who are engaging in fair dealing and providing good products and good customer service, that they're not being undercut by folks who are cutting corners and cheating and bilking consumers.And I'm reminded--I just came from Seattle; I told a roomful of folks, some of whom work for Microsoft, Bill Gates is a genius, Steve Jobs is a genius, Mark Zuckerberg, amazing what they've accomplished. But the Internet doesn't exist unless all of us together make an investment in something called DARPA that helped develop the Internet. That was a common enterprise that created this platform for success for everybody. The other side has got a different view. Their attitude is, you're on your own. If you're a kid born in a poor neighborhood in L.A., tough luck, you're on your own. If you're a senior citizen who, because of bad luck, got laid off, or the company ended up dissolving without your pension being vested, tough luck, you didn't plan well enough. That's not the America I believe in. That's not the America you believe in.And obviously, yesterday we made some news, but the truth is it was a logical extension of what America is supposed to be. It grew directly out of this difference in visions: Are we a country that includes everybody and gives everybody a shot and treats everybody fairly, and is that going to make us stronger? Are we welcoming to immigrants? Are we welcoming to people who aren't like us? Does that make us stronger? I believe it does.And so that's what's at stake. Now, I will just close by saying that this is going to be harder than it was the last time. This is going to be harder than it was the last time, not only because I'm older and grayer and your ""Hope"" posters are dog eared and--[laughter]. You know, 2008 in some ways was lightning in a bottle. That's not going to be replicated. And we shouldn't expect it to; I've been President for 3 1/2 years. But part of the reason it's going to be harder is because folks are still hurting out there and those frustrations with Washington and the nonsense they see on the news is making them more cynical than they were in 2008. So we're going to have to fight against cynicism and a belief that maybe things can't happen and maybe the game is rigged, what's the point. That's what we're going to be fighting against this time.And that means we're going to have to work harder. That means we're going to have to be more determined. That means that that passion that we brought to bear in 2008 is going to have to express itself maybe not in such flashy form, it's going to have to be steady, but we're going to have to keep those fires burning all the way through November and beyond. Because I'm not interested in just winning the election, I'm also interested in making sure that we can finish what we started in 2008. We've still got a lot of work to do.So bottom line is, I still believe in the American people, and I still believe in you. And I hope you still believe in me. Because I'm as determined as I've ever been to make sure that this country stays on the right path. We're moving forward; we're not going backwards.Thank you, everybody.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you very much. The--[applause]--it's good to be back in Seattle.A few people I want to acknowledge. First of all, please give a big round of applause to Sue for that unbelievable story, the great introduction, her incredible courage. She is just a--she's a--just a wonderful person. And I was saying backstage as I was listening, she's the kind of story that you don't read about in the papers. That's a story I'd like to read about: somebody overcoming so many challenges, doing the right thing. And I could not be prouder to have her introduce me.A couple of other folks that are here today that I want to acknowledge: your outstanding Governor, Chris Gregoire; your outstanding Lieutenant Governor, Brad Owen is here; one of the best United States Senators in the country, Patty Murray's in the house; former U.S. Representative and soon-to-be Governor, Jay Inslee is here.I want to thank King County Executive Dow Constantine; my--a terrific friend, former King County executive and somebody who did great work for us at HUD in Washington, Ron Sims; State party chair Dwight Pelz; and of course, somebody who I just love and I'm just such a huge fan of because he's a great person in addition to being a great musician, Dave Matthews.Audience member. I love you!The President. [Laughter] I love you too. So, Seattle, I'm here not just because I need your help--although I do; you'll hear more about that. I'm here because your country needs your help.Now, there was a reason why so many of you worked your hearts out in 2008. And it wasn't because you thought it would be easy. You did support a candidate named Barack Hussein Obama. The odds are rarely in your favor in that situation. [Laughter] You didn't need a poll to tell you that might not be a sure thing.You did not join the campaign because of me. You came together--we came together--because of a shared vision. We came together to reclaim that basic bargain that built the largest middle class and the most prosperous nation on Earth.We came together because we believed that in America, your success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth. If you're willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job. If you're meeting your responsibilities, you should be able to own a home, maybe start a business. You should be able to give your kids the chance to do even better than you, no matter who you are, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter what your last name, no matter who you love.And so we came together. This wasn't just about me. This was you guys making a commitment to each other to try to bring about change because our country had strayed from these basic values. We'd seen a record surplus that was squandered on tax cuts for people who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. Two wars were being waged on a credit card. Wall Street speculators reaped huge profits by making bets with other people's money. Manufacturing was leaving our shores. A shrinking number of Americans did fantastically well, but a lot more people struggled with falling incomes and rising costs and the slowest job growth in a century.So it was a house of cards, and it collapsed in the most destructive, worst crisis that we've seen since the Great Depression. And sometimes people forget the magnitude of it, you know? And you saw some of that, I think, in the video that was shown. Sometimes I forget. In the last 6 months of 2008, while we were campaigning, nearly 3 million of our neighbors lost their jobs; 800,000 lost their jobs in the month that I took office. And it was tough. But the American people proved they were tougher. So we didn't quit. We kept going. Together, we fought back.When my opponent said we should just let Detroit go bankrupt, we made a bet on American workers, on the ingenuity of American companies, and today our auto industry is back on top of the world.We saw manufacturers start to invest in America again, consistently adding jobs for the first time since the 1990s. Businesses got back to basics, created over 4 million jobs in the last 26 months, more than 1 million of those in the last 6 months alone.So we're making progress. Are we satisfied? Of course not. Too many of our friends, too many of our family are still out there looking for work. Too many homes are still underwater. Too many States are still laying off teachers and first-responders. A crisis this deep didn't happen overnight, and we understand it won't be solved overnight. We've got more work to do. We know that.But here's what else we know: that the last thing we can afford is a return to the policies that got us here in the first place. Not now. Not with so much at stake. We've come too far to abandon the changes that we fought for these past few years. We've got to move forward, to the future that we imagined in 2008, where everybody gets a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody plays by the same rules. That's the choice in this election. And, Seattle, that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America.Now, my opponent in this election, Governor Romney, he's a patriotic American. He's raised a wonderful family. He should be proud of the great personal success he's had as the CEO of a large financial firm. But I think he's drawn the wrong lessons from those experiences. He actually believes that if CEOs and the wealthiest investors like him get rich, that the rest of us automatically do too. [Laughter]When a woman in Iowa shared the story of her financial struggles, he gave an answer right out of an economics textbook. He said, ""Our productivity equals our income,"" as if the only reason people can't pay their bills is because they're not productive enough.Well, that's not what's going on. Most of us who have spent some time talking to people understand that the problem isn't that the American people aren't working hard enough, aren't productive enough; you've been working harder than ever. The challenge we face right now--the challenge we've faced for over a decade--is that harder work isn't leading to higher incomes. Bigger profits haven't led to better jobs.What Governor Romney does not seem to get is that a healthy economy doesn't just mean maximizing your own profits through massive layoffs or busting unions. You don't make America stronger by shipping jobs or profits overseas. When you propose cutting your own taxes while raising them on 18 million families, that's not a recipe for economic growth.And by the way, there's nothing new of these--about these ideas. I--you know, I'm just starting to pay a little more attention to this campaign here, and--[laughter]--I keep on waiting for them to offer up something new. But it's just the same old stuff. [Laughter] It's the same agenda that they have been pushing for years. It's the same agenda that they implemented when they were last in charge of the White House, although, as Bill Clinton pointed out a few weeks ago, this time their agenda is on steroids. [Laughter] This time they want even bigger tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. This time they want even deeper cuts to things like education and Medicare and research and technology. This time they want to give banks and insurance companies even more power to do as they please.Now, somehow they think that these same bad ideas will lead to different results than they did the last time, or they're hoping you won't remember what happened the last time when we tried their bad ideas. [Laughter]Well, I'm here to say, Seattle, that we were there. We remember. We're not going back there. We're moving this country forward. We're moving forward. We're moving forward.Look, we don't expect government to solve all our problems, and it shouldn't try to solve all our problems. I learned from my mom that no education policy can take the place of a parent's love and attention and occasionally getting in your face. [Laughter] As a young man, I worked with a group of Catholic churches who taught me that no poverty program can make as much of a difference as the kindness and commitment of a caring soul. Not--[applause].And, Democrats, we have to remember some things. Not every regulation is smart. Not every tax dollar is spent wisely. Not every person can be helped who refuses to help themselves. We believe in individual responsibility. But that's not an excuse to tell the vast majority of responsible, hard-working Americans--folks like Sue, who've done all the right things--""you're on your own."" That if you're--have the misfortune, like most people do, of having parents who may not be able to lend you all the money you need for college, that you may not be able to go to college. That even if you pay your premiums every month, you're out of luck if an insurance company decides to drop your coverage when you need it most.That's not who we are. That's not what built this country. That's not reflective of what's best in us. We built this country together. We built railroads and highways. We built the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge. We built those things together. We sent my grandfather's generation to college on the GI bill, together. We did these things not because they benefited any particular individual, any particular group; we did these things because we were building a platform for everybody to be able to succeed. We were creating the conditions for everybody to be able to succeed. These things made us all richer. They gave us all opportunity. They moved us all together, all forward, as one Nation and as one people.And that's the true lesson of our past. We love the free market. We believe in rewarding entrepreneurship and risk. But when I hear my opponent and some of these folks talk as if somehow nobody had anything to do with the success of these businesses and our entrepreneurs, I have to remind them that we--we the people--invested in creating the Internet that allowed Microsoft and Google and Facebook to thrive. There's not a business in this country that's not benefiting from roads and bridges and airports, the investments we make together. Every time we've got a kid who's getting a great education in a public school and able to go to get an outstanding education at a public university, we're contributing to the possibilities of the free market succeeding. And that's the right vision for our future. That's the reason I'm running for President, because I believe in that vision. I believe in that vision.I'm running to make sure that by the end of this decade, more of our citizens hold college degrees than any other nation on Earth. I want that to happen here in America. I want to help our schools hire and reward the best teachers, especially in math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses are looking for right now, because that's what we need in the 21st century. Higher education can't be a luxury. Education is a--higher education is an imperative that every American should be able to afford, not just for young people, but for midcareer folks who have to retrain, have to upgrade their skills. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President.I'm running to make sure that the next generation of high-tech manufacturing takes root in places like Seattle and Cleveland and Pittsburgh and Charlotte. I want to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs and profits overseas. I want to reward companies that are creating jobs here in the United States of America. That's the choice in this election.I'm running so that we can----Audience member. [Inaudible]The President. I am running so that we can keep moving forward to a future where we control our own energy. Our dependence on foreign oil is at the lowest point it's been in 16 years. Because of the actions we took, by the middle of the next decade our cars will average nearly 55 miles per gallon. Thousands of Americans have jobs because the production of renewable energy in this country has nearly doubled in just 3 years.So now's not the time to cut these investments to pay for $4 billion a year in giveaways to the oil companies. Now's not--now's the time to end subsidies for an industry that's just doing fine on its own. Let's double down on clean energy that's never been more promising for our economy and for our security and for the safety of our planet. That's why I'm running, Seattle, and that's the choice in this election.For the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. Usama bin Laden is no longer a threat to this country. Al Qaida is on the path to defeat. And by 2014, the war in Afghanistan will be over.America is safer and it's more respected because of the courage and selflessness of our diplomats and our intelligence officers, but most of all, because of the United States Armed Forces.And as long as I'm Commander in Chief, this country will care for our veterans, and we will serve our veterans as well as they've served us, because no one who fights for this country should have to fight for a job or a roof over their heads when they come home. My opponent has a different view. He said it was ""tragic"" to end the war in Iraq. He says he won't set a timeline for ending the war in Afghanistan. I have set a timeline, and I intend to keep it. After a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives, that's cost us over a trillion dollars, the nation we need to build is our own.So we're going to use half of what we're no longer spending on war to pay down the deficit, and we're going to invest the rest in research and education and repairing our roads and our bridges and our runways and our wireless networks. That's the choice in this election.And I'm running to pay down our debt in a way that is balanced and a way that's responsible. After inheriting a trillion-dollar deficit, I signed 2 trillions of dollars of spending cuts into law. And now I want to finish the job responsibly and properly, streamlining Government, cutting more waste--there's still more there to be had--but also reforming our Tax Code so that it's simpler and fairer and it asks the wealthiest Americans to pay a little bit more.My opponent won't tell us how he'd pay for his new, $5 trillion tax cut, a tax cut that gives an average of $250,000 to every millionaire in the country. So we may not know the details, but we know the bill for that tax cut will either be passed on to our children, or it's going to be paid by a whole lot of ordinary Americans. And I refuse to let that happen again.We're not going to pay for another millionaire's tax cut by eliminating medical research projects into things like ovarian cancer or Alzheimer's. I refuse to pay for another tax cut by kicking children out of Head Start programs or asking students to pay more for college or eliminating health insurance for millions of poor and elderly and disabled Americans on Medicaid.And as long as I'm President of the United States, I'm not going to allow Medicare to be turned into a voucher that would end the program as we know it. We'll reform Medicare, not by shifting costs to seniors, but by reducing the spending that isn't making people healthier. There are ways of doing it that preserve this program that is so vital to so many people.So, Seattle, that's what's at stake. There's a lot at stake. On issue after issue, we can't afford to spend the next 4 years going backwards.America doesn't need to refight the battles we just had over Wall Street reform or health care reform. Listen to Sue. Here's what I know: Allowing 2.5 million young people to stay on their parent's health insurance plan, that was the right thing to do. Cutting prescription drug costs for seniors, right thing to do. We're not going back to the days when insurance companies had unchecked power to cancel your policy or deny you coverage or charge women differently from men. We're not going back. We're going forward.We don't need another political fight about ending a woman's right to choose or getting rid of Planned Parenthood or taking away access to affordable birth control. I want women to control their own health choices. That's--[applause]--just like I want my daughters to have the same economic opportunities as your sons. We're not going to turn back the clock. We're not turning back the clock.We're not returning to the days when you could be kicked out of the United States military just because of who you are and who you love. We're moving this country forward. We are moving forward to a country where every American is treated with dignity and with respect. And here in Washington, you'll have the chance to make your voice heard on the issue of making sure that everybody, regardless of sexual orientation, is treated fairly. You will have a chance to weigh in on this. We are a nation that treats people fairly. We're not going backwards. We're not going backwards. We're going forwards. We're going forward. We're going forward, where everybody--everybody--is treated with dignity and respect.We will not allow another election where multimillion-dollar donations speak louder than the voices of ordinary citizens.It's--[applause]--and it's time to stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they're children of undocumented immigrants. This country is at its best when we harness the God-given talents of every individual, when we hear every voice, when we come together as one American family--Black, White, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, disabled--everybody striving for the same dream. That's what we're fighting for. That's why I ran for President. That's why I'm running again for President. That's why I need your help.You know, Seattle, this election is actually going to be, I--even closer than the last. And the reason for that is too many of our friends and neighbors, they're still hurting because of this crisis. And they see what's going on in Washington, and they don't like it, and so there's just a frustration level there that will express itself in the election.And I hear from too many people who are wondering why they haven't been able to get one of the jobs that have been created. Because even if jobs have been created, until you got a job, that jobs report doesn't mean much. They're wondering why their home is still underwater or why their family hasn't been touched by the recovery. So there's still a lot of work to be done. And folks are just--they get so frustrated about Washington.And as I said, the other side, they're not going to--the other side will not be offering these Americans a real answer to their questions. They're not offering a better vision. They're not offering a new set of ideas. Everybody knows that. There's nothing you've heard from them where you say, man, I didn't think of that. [Laughter] Now, that's fresh. That's new. Maybe that will work. [Laughter] That's not what's going on here.What they will be doing is spending more money than we've ever seen before on negative ads, ads that exploit people's frustration for some short-term political gain. Over and over again, they'll tell you America is down and out. America is not working. They'll say, are you better off than you were, without mentioning that their frame of reference is before the worst crisis in our lifetime.We've seen this play before. And here's the thing: The real question, the question that we have to answer, the question that will actually make a difference in your life and the lives of your children and the lives of your grandchildren, it's not just about how we're doing today. It's about how we're doing tomorrow and the next day and the day after that.Will we be better off if more Americans get a better education? Will we be better off if we reduce our dependence on foreign oil? Will we be better off if we start doing some nation-building here at home? Will we be better off if we're investing in clean energy? Will we be better off if we ask the wealthiest Americans to pay for--their fair share? Will we be better off if we invest in new research and science and technology?When we look back 4 years from now or 10 years from now or 20 years from now, won't we be better off if we have the courage to keep moving forward? That's the question in this election. That's the question in this election. And that outcome is entirely up to you. You'll have to contend with even more negative ads, with more cynicism, more nastiness, sometimes just plain foolishness. [Laughter]But if there's one thing that we learned the last time around, one thing we learned in 2008, there is nothing more powerful than millions of voices calling for change. When you knock on doors, when you pick up the phone, when you talk to your friends, when you decide it's time for change to happen, guess what? Change happens. Change comes to America. And that's the spirit that we need again.If people ask you what this campaign is about, you tell them it's still about hope. You tell them it's still about change. You tell them it's still about ordinary people who believe that in the face of great odds, we can make a difference in the life of this country.Because I still believe, Seattle. I still believe. I still believe we're not as divided as our politics suggest. I still believe that we have more common ground than the pundits tell us. I believe we're not Democrats or Republicans first; I think we're Americans first. I still believe in you. I still believe in you, and that's why I'm asking you to still believe in me. I told you in 2008 that I wasn't a perfect man--maybe Michelle told you. [Laughter] And I won't be a perfect President. But I promised back when I was running that first time that I'd always tell you what I thought, and I'd always tell you where I stood, and I'd wake up every single day fighting as hard as I know how for you.And, Seattle, I've kept that promise. I have kept that promise, and I will keep it as long as I have the honor of being your President. So if you're willing to stick with me, if you're willing to fight with me, if you're willing to work even harder this election than the last one, I guarantee you we will move this country forward. We will finish what we started.I'm still fired up. I'm still ready to go. And we will show the world why it is that the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you.",2008,obama
"The President. All right! Give it up for Libby!Libby Blume. Hello. Thank you very much for coming. We're all very honored. I'm Libby. I'm the youngest of the Blumes. And I'm very, very proud to present the President of the United States of America.The President. Yay! Yay! Nice job!Thank you. Libby knows the key to good public speaking: Be brief. [Laughter] That always makes people happy.I just want to thank the entire Blume family--especially Libby--but in addition to Bruce and Ann, their other kids, Max, Rebecca, Jacob, and Scooter, for opening up this extraordinary home to us and for their friendship. I'm so grateful to you guys.Thanks for whoever is in charge of the weather. [Laughter] I've been told this is typical Seattle weather. [Laughter] But I've been here before so--[laughter].What I'm going to do is actually be pretty brief at the top because what I'd really enjoy is just answering questions and getting comments and kind of hearing what you guys are thinking about.We've been through an extraordinary period in American history: worst financial crisis, worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. When you think about the Blume family growing up, what a lot of this younger generation has seen is hardship and recession and people being laid off of work. And yet the good news is that America is full of incredibly resilient, wonderful, decent people who have been willing to buckle down and work through these difficult times, and as a consequence, the country, I think, is on a path of great strength and great promise.We've seen more than 4 million jobs created over the last 2 years, more than 800,000 just in the last 4 months alone; the greatest increase in manufacturing employment since the 1990s, a lot of that having to do with an auto industry that has surged back after a period of time when a lot of us thought that they might go under. Here in this region, the last time I was in Seattle--I think it was the last time--we had a chance to visit Boeing, which is as good of a symbol of American ingenuity and American promise, and I teased the CEO there that I deserve a gold watch because we've been selling a lot of planes all around the world. [Laughter]And so slowly, in fits and starts, the economy is getting stronger, and businesses are starting to invest again. And in fact, you're starting to see companies that had moved to places like China recognizing: Why would we abandon the largest market in the world? Wages are going up in China and workers are getting more productive here; let's start bringing companies and businesses back.We've still got headwinds. Europe is still in a difficult state, partly because they didn't take some of the decisive steps that we took early on in this recession. Gas prices are still pinching a lot of folks. The housing market is still very weak all across the country. But the good news is that we have weathered the storm and are in a position now to make sure that the 21st century is the American century just like the 20th century was.But in order to do that, we've got to make good choices. And when I ran in 2008, I did not run just to get the country back to where it was before the crisis, because there had been problems that had been building for decades. And so the question was, were we finally going to take on some of these core challenges that had been holding us back for far too long? And that's the reason why, even as we were trying to manage the auto bailout, even as we were trying to deal with the banks and the fact that credit was locked up, even as we were trying to make sure that we could immediately put people back to work, we were also looking at what are the long-term things that are going to make a big difference in the life of this country?That's why we took on health care. And I am very proud of the fact that you got 2.5 million young people who have health insurance because they can stay on their parents' plans right now that didn't have it before and 30 million who stand to get it over the next couple of years.That's the reason why we took on energy. And not only have we increased traditional energy in this country--oil and gas--but we're looking at the energies sources of the future and have doubled clean energy investment and raised fuel efficiency standards, doubling fuel efficiency standards on cars, which will not only end up saving about $8,000 for the average consumer over the life of a car, but is going to take huge amounts of carbon out of the atmosphere and is part of what's contributing to some of the lowest levels of oil imports that we've seen in years, which obviously has national security implications.It's the reason why we took on education. And in addition to investing in reform at the K-through-12 level, we're also making sure that every young person has access to a college education and rechanneled money that was going to banks in the student loan program, tens of billions of dollars that are now going directly to students in the form of Pell grants. And now we've got a little more work to do to make sure that interest on their student loans don't double on July 1.That's why we made investments during the Recovery Act to rebuild our roads and our bridges and our ports, but also to start looking at things like high-speed rail and new broadband lines into rural areas that didn't have them before. Because the fact is that, historically, America grows not just because a few folks are doing well, but because we create a platform where everybody can succeed. Anybody who's working hard, everybody who's willing to put in the time and the effort and the energy, anybody who's got a new idea, no matter what they look like, no matter where they come from, they can succeed. And through their success, we all succeed.And we're huge admirers of individual initiative, and we insist on individual responsibility, but we also recognize, this country succeeds together, not apart. And that is going to be probably the biggest theme in this election, because we've got another party on the other side that just has a fundamentally different view about how to make sure that America succeeds. I think they're patriotic folks. I think they care about this country. But I also think that they have a very narrow vision that says, if I'm doing well, then it's up to everybody else to figure their own way.And that's certainly not the reason I'm here. I'm here because my grandfather, after coming back from World War II, was able to study on the GI bill. I'm here because my mother, a single mom, was able to get scholarships and grants to help her make her way through school. Michelle and I are where we are today because, although we came from very modest backgrounds, we got some of the best education in the world.When I hear people talk about the free enterprise system and entrepreneurship, I try to remind them, you know, all of us made that investment in DARPA that helped to get the Internet started; so there's no Facebook, there's no Microsoft, there's no Google if we hadn't made this common investment in our future.And that's what we're going to be debating. There are going to be a lot of ups and downs and a lot of other issues, but the fundamental issue is going to be, do we believe that we grow together, or do we believe that ""you're on your own"" is a better model for how we advance not just our interests, but the future of our children?Now, we've still got a lot of work to do. And the reason I'm running is because there's a lot of unfinished business. Still too many people out of work, and there's some things we could be doing right now to put construction workers back to work rebuilding America. There are things we could be doing right now to invest in science and technology to make sure we maintain a cutting edge.We haven't done as much on energy and climate change as we need to do. And so continuing to push for the kinds of work that a company like McKinstry is doing, making sure that we have energy-efficient buildings and companies and universities and hospitals and schools all across the country. We could reduce our consumption of energy by about 20 percent just by making these simple investments, and we haven't done that yet. We've made progress, but we've got more work to do.We've still got to reform an immigration system that is broken and make sure that young people who are raised in this country with our kids, that they're treated as the Americans that they are and they're given an opportunity to serve and make of themselves what they will, because that's also part of our tradition.We're a great country because what binds us together isn't just what we look like or our last names, but we share a creed. And if you believe in America, then you can be part of it.So we're going to have a whole lot of work to do over the next 5 years, and I'm not going to be able to get there on my own. I practice what I preach. In the same way that I don't think a society is successful on its own, well, my campaign is not successful on its own. Back in 2008, we didn't succeed because of me, we succeeded because of you, because all of you made a common commitment to a common vision of what America should be.And I'm hoping that you're willing to continue with me on this always fascinating journey. [Laughter] Thank you.",2008,obama
"Thank you! Well, it is wonderful to be with all of you. There are a couple of special acknowledgements I want to make. First of all, I just want to thank Ricky Martin for being here today. Those of you who haven't caught ""Evita"" yet, go out there. I'm sure there's still tickets available. [Laughter] But you know that he's going to be spectacular in it. And I'm so grateful for him stepping out and being willing to support me in this way.I want to thank Donald and Shelley Rubin for not only making this extraordinary event possible, but all that they've done for the civic life of New York. Please give them a big round of applause.I want to thank Raj Goyle, who helped to put this together. And he's got two beautiful daughters, one of whom he's still holding like this, and it's--[laughter]--it reminds me of when Malia and Sasha were like this, and now they're like this. [Laughter] But I want to thank Raj for this.Your outstanding attorney general, Eric Schneiderman, is in the house, so please give him a big round of applause as well.So we've been busy. [Laughter] We've got a few things to do here. I'm here to ask for your help, but I'm also here because your country needs your help. When we ran 4 years ago, I think we all understood that the campaign wasn't just about me. It was about the commitment we made to each other to make sure that this country lived up to the meaning of its creed. The idea that all of us, if we worked, if we tried, we could make it here in America, regardless of what we look like, where we came from, who we loved, what our surnames were; the notion that those basic values of responsibility and hard work, of giving back, that that's what built this country and we built it together. And we felt like we had lost some of those core values.When I was first elected, we were looking backwards at a decade of manufacturing moving overseas and the middle class struggling with flat wages and flat incomes, even though the cost of everything from college to health care had been skyrocketing. We had seen recklessness by some on Wall Street, almost bringing the economy to its knees, an auto industry that was on the verge of collapse, a foreign policy that had not gained us the kind of respect that we needed in the world and had cost us over a trillion dollars.And so we understood we had a lot of work to do. And the month that I took office we were losing 800,000 jobs that month, and we had already lost 4 million, and we'd lose another 3 million after that. And so these have been tough times. It's been tough times for the country, tough times for a lot of families all across America.But the good news is the American people have proven to be tougher. And so for all the challenges that we've gone through, we have seen families across America willing to cut back on things they didn't need, to make sure that they were looking after their kids and doing the things that they did need to do. There were some people who had to go back and retrain because the industries that they were in were no longer operating at that same capacity. We've seen businesses that had to scale back, but did everything they could to keep their workers.And because of all these individuals efforts and, frankly, some tough, but good decisions that we made early on, we're weathering this storm and we've seen the country start to come back. Four million jobs created over the last 2 years alone. Just in the last 6 months, over a million jobs. The auto industry all the way back, so that GM is now once again the biggest carmaker in the world and producing better cars, because we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars so that by the middle of the next decade everybody is going to be getting 55 miles a gallon, and that will save the average family about $8,000. And we'll be taking a whole bunch of carbon out of the atmosphere so that we can make sure that all these wonderful kids who are in attendance are inheriting a planet that hasn't been wrecked because we didn't take the proper decisions.We've doubled our production of clean energy, even as our oil production is higher and our imports of oil from other countries are lower.We ended the war in Iraq as promised, and we're now winding down the war in Afghanistan.And so we've done a lot over these last 3 1/2 years to make sure that the country was able to manage through this crisis that we have not seen in our lifetimes before. But we--I did not just run and you didn't just support me just to get back to the status quo. And we know that there are still families out there that are having a tough time, people whose homes are still underwater. We still know that there are too many children all across America who don't have the kind of opportunities that we want them to have and that America needs them to have.And so we now come to this point this election where the American people are going to have a choice, and this choice is going to be as important as any choice that we've made in a very long time; in some ways, more important than 2008, because we've got a very clear contrast this time.John McCain believed in climate change and believed in immigration reform. On some issues, there was a sense of independence. What we've got this time out is a candidate who said he'd basically rubber stamp a Republican Congress who wants us to go backwards and not forwards on a whole range of issues.They've got an economic theory that basically says the only way to grow the economy is to slash everybody's taxes further, especially the wealthiest Americans, to dismantle Government in so many ways. And that somehow, if everybody--the most powerful in our society are left to do whatever it is that they want, that somehow we're going to be better off.And we've just got a completely different vision about how America has succeeded. And it's rooted in fact and it's rooted in history. [Laughter] It's based on what we've seen, because the ideas that they're putting forward have been tried. We tried them between 2000 and 2008, and it resulted in the most sluggish job growth that we've ever seen, resulted in all kinds of phony financial profits and debt, and resulted in the worst financial crisis and economic crisis we've seen since the 1930s. So we--it's not as if they're offering any new ideas. They're basically saying you're on your own, and when everybody is on their own, somehow we're better off.And we've got a contrasting vision that says we are stronger together, that America was built together, that all of us have responsibilities, that we thrive in a free market where risk takers and innovators are rewarded for taking a bet, taking a chance. But we also understand that we grew because we made a decision at some point we were going to have public schools where every kid--immigrants who showed up here in New York City fleeing wars in Europe--that they could come here and suddenly go into a public school and learn and end up winning Nobel Prizes and starting Fortune 500 companies. That was how we built this country.We built this country around the idea that everybody should have access to a great college education. And so as a consequence, we set up--President Lincoln, the first Republican President, set up land-grant colleges all across this country, where the kid of a farmer could suddenly go and learn something new and all of us would become more productive because of it.This country was built because together we built the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge and the Interstate Highway System. That's how we sent a man to the Moon, that's how the Internet was invented, because we did these things together.My grandfather went to college on the GI bill because we understood that that would help make everybody rich. We didn't do those things just because it was good for one group or one individual. We did it because we understood that when everybody has got a shot, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, we all do better. And that's what's at stake in this election. Those are the contrasting visions. And we know which direction this country needs to go in.This is a country that needs to invest in clean energy because we don't need to be subsidizing big oil companies to the tune of $4 billion a year. We need to double down on solar and wind and biofuels that are going to help reduce our dependence on foreign oil and clean up our environment. We know that it's important for us to make sure that young people are able to afford to go to college--everybody, not just some.We know that we have to invest in science and technology and stem cell research and all the things that can help lead to amazing medical and scientific breakthroughs. We know that we've got to rebuild this country, which is why I want to spend half of the money that we're saving on wars we're no longer fighting to build our roads and our bridges and our airports.And we also know that if we're going to restore a sense of middle class security, that we've got to make sure that we're rewarding businesses that are investing here in the United States, not businesses that are shipping jobs overseas. We know these things.And we can do it. And we can do it in a balanced way. And one of the big arguments we're going to have over the next 4 or 5 months is, how do we pay for stuff? And I happen to believe that it makes sense for us to make these investments to make sure that Social Security and Medicare are still there for the next generation, to make sure that we're not kicking poor kids and people with disabilities and seniors who don't have any other means off of Medicaid just to balance our budgets. I think that I can afford to pay a little bit more, and frankly, some of the people in this room can afford to pay a little bit more, so that we can bring down our debts in a responsible way: cutting out waste, cutting out programs that don't work anymore, but also making sure that everybody is paying their fair share.And at root, so much of this has to do with a belief that not only are we all in this together, but all of us are equal in terms of dignity and in terms of respect, and everybody deserves a shot. So part of what we've been spending a lot of time doing is just making sure that those ideals that we profess are made real.The first bill I signed, the Lilly Ledbetter Act--a simple proposition--equal pay for equal work. I don't want my daughters treated differently than my sons. That's the reason why we're fighting for comprehensive immigration reform, because I believe that a child who's here, raised with our kids, playing with our kids, has as much talent as our kids, the notion that somehow they would not have the capacity, the ability to proclaim themselves Americans and to fulfill their American Dream, that's not who we are and that's not what we're about.The announcement I made last week about my views on marriage equality, same principle. The basic idea: I want everybody treated fairly in this country. We have never gone wrong when we expanded rights and responsibilities to everybody. That doesn't weaken families, that strengthens families. It's the right thing to do.On each and every one of these issues, there is a fundamental difference between the candidates. And when we passed health care reform, we did it because a country this wealthy, we shouldn't have 30 million people without health insurance. That's not an efficient way to go. We shouldn't have people showing up at emergency rooms that we end up having to pay for indirectly because we couldn't give them preventive care. I don't want women being charged more than men for their ailments. That's not right. I want to make sure that seniors who have been paying into Medicare, that they've got Medicare that they can count on in their golden years. And we've got to make some changes, but we're not going to voucherize that program.So I'm--it's been said that this election is going to be about values, and I absolutely agree. It's about the economic values we have, about the values that I believe are what makes America so special: the idea that everybody gets a fair shot, everybody does their fair share, everybody plays by the same set of rules. So everything we do--from Wall Street reform, making sure that banks aren't taking risks with other people's money that taxpayers may have to end up bailing out later, to repealing DOMA, to getting the ""DREAM Act"" passed, to investing in our schools, to rebuilding manufacturing in America--all of these things are designed to make sure that we're restoring middle class security for all those folks out there that are struggling for their small portion of the American Dream.And the good news is, I think the American people are on our side on this. When you ask them specifically about all these issues, they ultimately choose the vision that I'm presenting over the one that the other side is presenting. The only thing that's holding us back is the fact that things are still tough out there. There are still too many people without work, and there are still too many people who are struggling to get by even if they've got work.And what's also going to make this a very close race is the fact that you've got special interests and these super PACs that are spending money on negative ads in unprecedented ways. And their message is going to be very simple: You know what, you're frustrated, you're dissatisfied, and it's Obama's fault. You can boil down the message. [Laughter] That's--we were traveling around trying to prevent a doubling of student loan rates, and the Republicans said, he's trying to distract from the economy. Well, now, the last I checked, making sure our kids got a good education and weren't loaded down with debt, that had something to do with our economy. But what they really meant was, this distracts from our basic argument that you're frustrated and it's Obama's fault. [Laughter] And they will spend hundreds of millions of dollars trying to drill that home.But I'm not worried. And the reason I'm not worried is because of you, because I believe that if we are getting our message out effectively, if we are describing not only what we've done over the last 3 1/2 years, not only the 2 1/2 million young people who have health insurance who wouldn't otherwise have it because they can stay on their parent's plan, not just everything that we've done to make sure that we're changing the rules on things like people being able to visit their loved ones in hospitals, not just everything that we've done in terms of restoring the auto industry, but when we describe what we plan to do for the future, if we can get that message out effectively, I believe we'll win. But more importantly, the country will win.But I'm going to need all of you. This is going to be a tough race. It is going to be a tight race. Nobody should be taking this for granted, especially when I come to New York sometimes people go around and say, I don't know anybody who is not supporting you, Barack. [Laughter] I say, you live in Manhattan, man. [Laughter]This is going to be a challenging race. But we can win as long as all of you are activated, as long as all of you are motivated, as long as you're doing everything you can, not just making phone calls, not just raising money, but I want folks out hitting the streets, knocking on doors, talking to your family, talking to your friends.In 2008, a lot of people were skeptical, but we showed them that when ordinary folks are motivated, they can't be stopped. When they decide it's time for change to happen, change happens. And that's going to happen this time as well.I used to say in 2008, I'm not a perfect man, and I'm not going to be a perfect President, but I'd always tell you what I thought, I always would tell you where I stood, and I'd work every single day--every day I would wake up thinking about how I could make your lives better and making sure that every kid out there has the same kind of amazing possibilities that Malia and Sasha have. And that promise I've kept.So I still believe in you. I hope you still believe in me. And if you do, I'm absolutely positive we're going to win this election.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"Thank you. Well, first of all, let me thank Tony and Amie for hosting us here today. Describing what it's like to have people move furniture out of six of your rooms--[laughter]--and I've been assured that it will all be put back where it was. [Laughter]I want to thank all of you for being here. And frankly, because this is a nice, intimate setting, I'm not going to spend a lot of time talking at the top; I want to spend most of the time answering your questions, taking your comments, having a conversation.I tell you though, I couldn't make the argument too much better than Tony just made it. When I ran in 2008, it was based on the premise that America was built on the idea that anybody can make it if they try, that everybody gets a fair shot, everybody does their fair share, everybody plays by the same rules. And that idea had been slipping away for too long. So you'd seen a decade of sluggish job growth, incomes and wages had flatlined even as the cost of health care and college were going up. And the question was, how do we restore that sense of balance?Now, this is all before we had a sense that we were going to be experiencing the worst financial crisis and the worst economic crisis in our lifetimes. And over the last 3 1/2 years, obviously, we have had extraordinary challenges, challenges unlike any that we've seen. And there are a lot of folks still hurting out there: a lot of people who are still looking for work or underemployed, a lot of folks whose homes are still underwater, a lot of people who are fearful or anxious about the future.But we've made progress. The good news is, is that over the last 2 years, we've created more than 4 million jobs, a million jobs in the last 6 months--close to the last 6 months alone. We have been able to restore the greatness of the U.S. auto industry at a time when a lot of folks thought it would liquidate. We've doubled clean energy production. We've been able to start seeing manufacturing come back to our shores in a way that a lot of people hadn't anticipated. The financial system, although it is still healing, is in obviously much better shape than it was back in 2007, 2008.So we've made some progress. Now, the reason I'm running is we haven't made enough yet. We still have a long way to go. And this election is going to present as stark a choice in terms of visions for the future as any election that we've seen in a very long time. I believe that the free market is the greatest wealth generator ever devised by man, and it's at the heart, at the core, of who we are. I think risk takers and innovators should be rewarded. I think all of us benefit from the freedom of free enterprise.But if you look at our history, what we also realize is that what makes our markets work and what allows us then to go out and pursue our individual dreams is that there are some things we've done in concert. There are some things that we've done as a common enterprise: making sure that our schools are teaching our kids the skills that they need to compete in a new economy; making certain that we're investing in science and research so that the next medical breakthrough or the next great business idea takes root right here in the United States; making sure we're investing in roads and bridges and airports and broadband lines and wireless networks that allow--that provide a platform for businesses and individuals to succeed; and making sure that we've got basic rules of the road in place so that the markets function in a transparent, clear way so that small investors have confidence if they invest on Wall Street they're not going to get bilked by somebody who has more information than them; that we make sure that our financial system is stable and that we're not going to tip over into a situation where, because of somebody's miscalculation or sometimes just because of panic, suddenly, the whole system is at risk; making sure that we have a basic safety net so that seniors who have worked all their lives can count on Social Security and Medicare; that the most vulnerable among us are cared for through programs like Medicaid; and making sure that something like health care is not the luxury of a few, but is something that if people are playing by the rules and working hard, they can count on, and they don't have to worry about losing their home because their child gets sick.And in this campaign, what's going to be tested is whether that view which says, yes, we believe in individual initiative and we believe in risk-taking and we believe in markets and entrepreneurship, but we also believe in doing some things together, because all of us prosper from that, whether that's a better idea. Or the better idea is just, everybody is on their own, we slash taxes more for those of us who have been incredibly fortunate and blessed by this system, slowly those rungs on the ladder to upward mobility start to fray; people are left to fend for themselves. There is a theory that that somehow is going to unleash the kind of growth that we imagine for this country. And my argument is, is that we tried it and it doesn't work. It's not good for the markets. It's not good for business. It's not good for consumers. It's not good for our kids. It's not good for our future.And that's ultimately what this election is going to be about. When you cut through all the other stuff--there's going to be a lot of noise and a lot of day-to-day skirmishes and arguing--but ultimately, it's going to come down to, whose vision do you believe? And I think we've got the facts and the evidence on our side. And the fact that you're all here today tells me that you're interested in that same kind of vision, one in which our kids succeed, but you know what, other people's kids succeed too. Because I think that will be a better America and a better world for our kids as well.This is going to be a tough election. This is going to be a close election precisely because there are folks out there who are still hurting. But I'm pretty confident that if we work hard, if we stay true to that vision, that it's the one that the American people believe in as well.So I'm grateful for your help. I'm looking forward to your questions. And I hope you are ready to get to work. All right, thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you, everybody. Please, please have a seat.Well, let me start out by just saying that the Goldman family and Doug and Lisa, they have had my back from the get-go. At a time when a lot of people had no idea who I was, they stepped up and were enormous supporters, along with some of the people in this room. They've been great friends. Even though the boys here beat me in air hockey--[laughter]--they haven't rubbed it in, except for when I show up and they have an air hockey table here. [Laughter] But they've just been extraordinary supporters, and I could not thank them more for everything that they've done. So please give them another round of applause.I want to thank David Crosby and Graham Nash for providing some wonderful music. It's not every day you get Rock and Roll Hall of Famers strumming the guitar for you. So we really appreciate them. And they've been wonderful supporters as well. We really appreciate that.I want to thank Don Cheadle for helping to frame the debate here. And Don has been a terrific friend as well. I'm not going to talk about the basketball game we had a couple of weeks ago. [Laughter] We're not going to say anything about it.Actor Don Cheadle. Thank you.The President. Nothing. [Laughter]And I want to thank all of you for being here.Now, in these kinds of settings, I try not to give a long speech. What I'd like to do is just make some very brief remarks at the top, because I want to save as much time as possible just for questions, for comments, for advice. I always get advice at these things so--[laughter]--I'm sure this crowd will not be shy.But as has already been said, we've gone through 3 1/2 of the toughest years in our lifetimes. It wasn't just the 800,000 jobs a month that we were losing. We had lost 3 million jobs before I was even sworn into office. We had lost 8 million before our economic policies had a chance to take effect. And we've still got a long way to go here in California and all across the country. There are a lot of folks who are hurting, people are out of work or underemployed, people whose homes are $100,000 underwater and have no sense of how they'll ever get out from under the debts that they've accumulated. There are an awful lot of young people here who are extraordinarily talented, but don't see a path or a vision for the future. So our work is not done.The good news, though, is that we're beginning to steer that ship in the right direction. We've set a path and a target and a direction where this is again a country where everybody gets a fair shot, everybody does their fair share, everybody plays by the same set of rules. A lot of that has to do with making sure that every kid in this country is getting a good education. And I could not be prouder of the work that we've done on education reform.A lot of it has to do with making sure that higher education is not a luxury. And it's not just 4-year colleges. We need more engineers, we need more scientists, we need more Stanford grads, but we also need folks who are going to community colleges and are able to get the skills and the training that they need in order to compete for jobs the 21st century.We're making progress when it comes to science and innovation and all the investments that we've been making to try to make sure that we retain the edge that made us into an economic superpower. We've started to rebuild our infrastructure, not just the infrastructure of the past, not just roads and bridges, but also smart grids and high-speed rail.We're starting to make progress when it comes to advanced manufacturing, bringing jobs back here to the United States of America. And our exports have surged. We're opening up markets all across the world. And it turns out that America continues to have the best workers and the best businesses in the world. We just have to get organized, and we're starting to do so.Health care continues to be an extraordinary challenge, but we're starting to see the impact of the health care bill. And young people, 2.5 million young people who are able to stay on their parent's plan because of the health care bill, millions of seniors who are seeing reductions in the cost of their prescription drugs. And ultimately, 30 million people who right now are showing up at the emergency room are going to have the chance for affordable, decent health care coverage. And in the process, we're rationalizing the system, so that we start driving down costs.We've doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars. We have doubled the amount of clean energy that we're producing. We've still got a long way to go to have the kind of energy strategy that we need. But we actually have seen our imports of foreign oil drop down under 50 percent, the lowest that it's been in 15 years. And through not only the production of clean energy, but massive investments in energy efficiency, we've got a chance to get control of our energy future in a way that is good for our economy, good for our national security, and is good for our environment. And we can start tackling climate change in a serious way and lead the world on that issue.It's been mentioned that we ended the war in Iraq. We're in the process of ending the war in Afghanistan. And in the process, we're also restoring respect for this country all around the world. I had a chance to speak to 1,100 cadets who were graduating from the Air Force Academy this afternoon--this morning. And I told them, don't buy this whole notion that America's influence is declining in the world, because the truth is, as we travel everywhere, we continue to be the agenda setters. Folks continue to look to us to help shape international rules and norms that allow us to tackle things like terrorism or climate change or poverty and development. We continue to be the one indispensible nation. And because we project it with our values and our ideals and restored a sense of rule of law, people are paying attention, people are listening, and people are hungry for our leadership.So the strides that we've made over the last 3 1/2 years have been extraordinary, but we've still got a long way to go. We've got a lot of work to do. We may not even finish it in 5 years, but I certainly need 5 more years to get us locked in on where we need to go.And that's where all of you come in. A lot of people here have made a lot of sacrifices to put me in this office. And you've continued to help inform and guide a lot of my thinking on a lot of important issues. But I tell you, we're not done. And as much noise as there is out there--and those of you who follow this stuff and you're reading blogs and watching cable TV and it feels like the sky is falling--let me tell you, when you get out into the country, this is a country full of decent people who believe in America and are generous and kind and tolerant.You know, I gave one commencement this week before I went to the Air Force Academy; it was the high school graduation at Joplin High. Now, you'll recall this is a town that had been devastated by a tornado, and the kids ended up going to high school in a mall, and they ended up eating at the food court there for lunch, which they thought was an improvement. [Laughter] But to see the faces of these young people and their parents, and all they had been through--there was a young man who had lost both his parents in the tornado, had been thrown and was out for 3 days. When he finally woke up, he had to go through 5 weeks of rehabilitation, and he had to look after a sister. And he was graduating this year and going on to college. And when you talk to a young man like that and he says, ""I know it's not easy, but I don't quit,"" that captures who we are and what we're about.And that's been displayed--that resilience and that strength has been displayed--over the last 3 1/2 years, just like it's been displayed over the last 300 years. And that's not fading. That's as strong as it's ever been. And that's what inspires me. That's what makes me as determined now, more determined now than I was in 2008.So I hope you have that same determination, because I intend to win this things, and I intend to keep on changing this country.So thank you. Thank you. Thank you, guys.",2008,obama
"The President. How's it going, Redwood City? Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you, guys. Well, it is good to be back in California.A couple of people I just want to acknowledge. First of all, your mayor, Alicia Aguirre; give her a big round of applause--she's here. And please give it up for Ben Harper for performing tonight.Now, you guys can have a seat. I'm going to be talking for a while. [Laughter] It is good to see all of you. Are you having fun tonight?Well, listen, I'm here not just because I need your help--although I do need your help. I'll get to that in a second. But I'm here because your country needs your help.Now, 4 years ago, we came together because we wanted to reclaim the basic bargain that had built the largest middle class and the most prosperous nation on Earth. We shared a belief that in America, your circumstances shouldn't be determined--or your success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth, right? We--and you can see that in Redwood City--people from every background, from every corner not just of the country, but of the world.This represents that idea that if you're willing to work hard, you should be able to create a life for yourself and your family, find a good job. If you're willing to meet your responsibilities, you should be able to own a home and maybe start a business, strike out with a new idea, send your kids to a good school, give them a chance to do even better than you, no matter who you are, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter who you love. So that's why we did all this in 2008. This wasn't a commitment you made because of me. This was a commitment you made to each other, because you felt that the country had strayed from some of those basic values.We watched a record surplus that was squandered on tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't asking for them. We saw two wars being waged on a credit card. We saw speculation in the financial sector, reaping huge profits for a few folks who were making bets with other people's money, but it was a flimsy kind of success. Manufacturing left our shores. A shrinking number of Americans did really, really well, but a growing number saw falling incomes and stagnant job growth and rising costs for everything from college to health care.And so we had strayed from those values. And we built a house of cards. It ended up collapsing in the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression: lost 3 million jobs while we were campaigning; 800,000 jobs lost the month I took office.And it's been tough. But it turns out the American people were tougher. We don't quit. We don't give up. We keep on going. Together, we fought back. We fought our way back. When some said, you know what, we should just let Detroit go bankrupt, we made a bet on American workers and American innovators and American companies, and today, the auto industry is back on top of the world.Manufacturers are starting to invest in America again, adding jobs for the first time consistently since the nineties. Businesses got back to basics. Small-business owners, entrepreneurs, they hung on, made it work, kept on their employees where they could--created over 4 million jobs in the last 26 months, more than 1 million in the last 6 months alone.Now, we're not satisfied. We've got a lot more to do. Not when so many of our friends and family are still out of work. Not when so many homes are still underwater. Not when so many States are still laying off teachers and first-responders.This crisis--a crisis this deep--didn't happen overnight, and it's not going to be solved overnight, so we've got more work to do. We know that. And that's why this year is so important. Because we know the last thing we can afford to do is to go back to the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. Not now. Not with so much at stake. We've come too far to abandon the changes that we've fought for, for the last few years.We've got to move forward and not backwards, forward to what we imagined in 2008: a country where everybody has got a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules. And that's the choice in this election, and that's why I'm running again for President of the United States.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. Now, you know we're starting to get into election season here. [Laughter] You know, I've still got my day job, and so I'm--[laughter]--I'm working hard solving problems. But I've got to pay attention to what the other side is up to. [Laughter]And my opponent in this election, Governor Romney, he's a patriotic American. He's raised a wonderful family. He should be proud of the great personal success he's had. [Laughter] No, I mean, he has been extraordinarily successful at the financial firm that he helped put together. But I think he's drawn the wrong lessons from these experiences. He seems to believe that if CEOs and wealthy investors like him are getting rich that the rest of us automatically do too.Now, we believe in the free market. We believe in risk-taking and innovation. This whole area is built on risk-taking and innovation. But we also understand that it doesn't happen in a vacuum. It happens because of outstanding schools and universities. It happens because of a well-regulated financial market. It happens because we have extraordinary infrastructure. It happens for a whole host of reasons.But Governor Romney doesn't seem to understand that. So, when a woman in Iowa shared the story of her financial struggles, he sounded like he was talking out of a textbook. He said, well, our productivity equals our income. Well, the implication was the only reason that somebody might be in financial hardship is because they're not productive enough, they're not working hard enough.But I have to tell you, those of us who have spent a lot of time talking to a lot of Americans have come to realize the problem isn't the American people aren't productive enough. Our productivity is actually higher than it's ever been. You've been working harder than ever. The challenge right now, the challenge we've faced for over a decade, is that harder work for too many people doesn't lead to higher incomes, and bigger profits don't necessarily lead to better jobs.And so what Governor Romney and my opponents don't seem to understand is that a healthy economy doesn't just mean maximizing the profits of some. That's important. That's part of our free market, but not if it's purchased at the cost of massive layoffs, not if your main strategy is busting unions. You don't make America stronger just by shipping jobs and profits overseas. You don't create an environment where everybody has got a fair shot if you're gutting all those investments that help to create a platform for everybody's success. You don't create economic growth when you propose cutting your own taxes while raising them on 18 million working families. That's not a recipe for broad-based economic growth.Of course, the fact is there's nothing new about these ideas. They've been peddling this stuff for years. Although, as Bill Clinton said a few weeks ago, this time their agenda is on steroids. But it's not new. They want bigger tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. They want even deeper cuts for things like education and Medicare and research and technology. They want to give banks and insurance companies even more power to do as they please and gut and strip out regulations that help protect consumers.But that's not new. That was tried, remember? The last guy did all this. [Laughter] Governor Romney, well, he is saying, well, my 25 years in private sector gives me a special understanding of how our economy works. Well, if that's true, why is he peddling the same bad ideas that brought our economy to the brink of collapse? Most good businesspeople I know, if something doesn't work, they do something different. So he must either think that there's going to be a different result, or he's hoping you don't remember what happened the last time we tried it his way.I'll tell you what, I remember. You remember. We were there. And we're not going back to that. We're moving this country forward. Now, you're going to be hearing a bunch of stuff during the course of this campaign. Of course, you've been hearing it for the last 3 1/2 years. They started saying it the day after I took office--actually the day I took office. [Laughter] So let's be clear. We don't expect government to solve all our problems. It shouldn't try. I learned from my mom there is no education policy that by itself can take the place of a parent's love and attention, and sometimes a stern rebuke.My first job as a community organizer was with Catholic churches who taught me the power of kindness and commitment to others in neighborhoods. Not everything in government works. Not every regulation is smart. Not every tax dollar is spent wisely. Not every person can be helped who refuses to help themselves. And the fact is, is that a bunch of the stuff that we do in government is outdated and has to be streamlined. And we've been focused on everything from making sure that they don't use rotary phones anymore to--[laughter]. I'm exaggerating. [Laughter]But there is all kinds of reorganization and streamlining that has to be done, because we want government to have the same customer service mentality that the best businesses do. We want folks to have that same sense of efficiency and effectiveness.But that's different from telling the vast majority of responsible, hard-working Americans, you're on your own; that unless you're lucky enough to have parents who can lend you the money, you may not be able to go to college; that even if you pay your premiums every month, you're out of luck if an insurance company decides to drop your coverage when you need it most. That's not who we are. That's not how America was built.We built this country together. We built railroads and highways, the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge together. We sent my grandfather's generation to college on the GI bill together. We went to the Moon together. The entire structure for the Internet we built together. All the stuff that's going on here can be traced back to investments we made together that then gave the opportunity, created the platform for Google and Facebook and you name it, because we understood that there are some things that we have to do together.And we didn't do it for some particular group or individual. We understood that stuff made us all richer. It gave us all opportunity. We move forward together, as one Nation and as one people. And that's the true lesson of our past. That's the right vision for our future. That's why I'm running again for President of the United States.I'm running to make sure that by the end of this decade, more of our citizens hold college degrees than any other nation on Earth. I want more engineers. I want more scientists. I want our schools to be able to hire and reward the best teachers, especially in math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses need so that workers can compete in the 21st century. Higher education is not a luxury, it is a necessity of this new global economy and everybody should be able to afford it. Everybody should be able to get that chance. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President.I'm running to make sure the next generation of high-tech innovation takes place right here, in Silicon Valley, in Cleveland, and in Pittsburgh and Charlotte and Chicago. I want to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs and profits overseas. I want to reward companies that are investing and creating jobs here in the United States. And that's the choice in this election.I want to keep moving towards a future where we control our own energy. Our dependence on foreign oil is at its lowest point in 16 years. We have doubled clean energy investments. We have raised fuel efficiency standards so the cars will be getting 55 miles a gallon. Thousands of Americans have jobs because of the investments we're making in things like advanced battery manufacturing. That's our future.And imagine what we could keep on doing if we weren't spending $4 billion a year on subsidies for the oil companies, and we were investing that in clean energy, we were investing it in energy efficiency. It is time for us to end subsidies for a mature industry that's rarely been more profitable. Let's double down on the clean energy future that's never been more promising for our economy and for our security and for the safety of our planet and doing something about climate change.We can make a difference. That's our future. That's our choice. And that's why I'm running for reelection--because we still have more work to do.For the first time in 9 years, we have no Americans fighting in Iraq. Usama bin Laden is no longer a threat to this country. Al Qaida is on the path to defeat. And by 2014, the war in Afghanistan will be over.America is safer and stronger and more respected around the world because of the courage and selflessness of the U.S. Armed Forces, because of their outstanding service. And as long as I'm Commander in Chief, this country will care for our veterans and serve our veterans as well as they've served us. They shouldn't have to fight for a job when they come home. They shouldn't be fighting homelessness when they come home. We need to look after them. That's what we've done for the last 3 1/2 years. And I want to keep on doing it as long as I'm President of the United States of America.And this is another place where my opponent has different ideas. He said ending the war was ""tragic""--in Iraq. He won't set a timeline for ending the war in Afghanistan. I have, and I intend to keep it. It's the right thing to do for our country, because after a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives and over a trillion dollars, the nation we need to build is our own.We will end this war responsibly. We will use half of what we're no longer spending to cut our deficit. We'll use the rest to do some rebuilding right here in research and education, in building new runways and wireless networks. That's the choice in this election.Audience member. [Inaudible]--loves you! [Laughter]The President. Well, I love you too. Thank you.And by the way, look--we're going to pay down our debt in a way that is balanced and responsible. I inherited a trillion-dollar deficit; I signed $2 trillion in spending cuts. My opponents won't admit it because it runs contrary to, I guess, the only argument they have, but since I've been President, Federal spending has actually risen at the lowest pace in nearly 60 years. It--usually it takes a Democrat to fix these problems after they have run up the tab.And so we're going to finish the job. Yes, by streamlining Government and cutting more waste. But we also need to reform our Tax Code so it's simpler and fairer and so it asks folks like me--the wealthiest Americans--just to pay a little more.And my opponent won't--he's proposed a $5 trillion tax cut on top of the Bush tax cut. This gives an average of $250,000 to every millionaire in the country. And although he won't detail how he's going to pay for it, I can tell you, either it's going to be passed on to our kids, or you're going to have to pay for it. A whole lot of ordinary Americans will have to pay for it.And I refuse to let that happen. We're not going to have another millionaires tax cut paid for by eliminating medical research for cancer and Alzheimer's, another tax cut paid for by kicking kids out of Head Start programs or asking students to pay more for college or eliminating health insurance for millions of poor, elderly, disabled Americans on Medicaid. We're not going to voucherize our Medicare system.We are going to reform Medicare and Medicaid, but we'll do it the right way, which is to stop spending money on things that don't make people healthier, actually reduce costs, don't just shift them on to seniors, don't just shift them off to folks who can't afford it. That's the right way to do it. And that's what's at stake.On issue after issue, these guys want to go backwards. America doesn't want to spend the next 4 years refighting the battles we just had over Wall Street reform. We're just seeing now how necessary it still is to just provide some basic rules for the road. We don't want to refight the battles of health care. We've got 2.5 million young people on their parent's health insurance plan. That was the right thing to do. Millions of seniors saving on their prescription drugs, that was the right thing to do. We're not going to go back to a time when insurance companies could just drop your coverage or cancel your policy or charge women more than men. We're not going back to that.We don't need another political fight about ending a woman's right to choose or getting rid of Planned Parenthood or taking away access to affordable birth control. I want women to control their own health care choices, just like I want my daughters to have the same opportunities as my sons. We're not rolling back the clock.We're not going back to the days when the U.S.--when somebody could be kicked out of the military just because of who you are and who you love. We're not going there. We're moving forward to a country where everybody is treated with dignity and respect. That's what we're moving towards.And we're not going to enshrine a system where elections are determined because you can write a $10 million check, drowning out the voices of other citizens. We're not going to go--we're not going to give up on the notion that it makes no sense for us to deny citizenship to responsible young people who want to start a business here or work here, to contribute to this country, to serve their country, just because their parents might have been undocumented. That doesn't make sense. This country is best when we harness the God-given talents of every individual and we hear every voice and we come together as one American family, striving for the same American Dream. That's what we're fighting for. That's why I'm running for President. That's why I need your help.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. Now, let me tell you, this election is going to be tougher than the last. We've got more negative ads, more undisclosed spending.Audience member. Super PACs.The President. More super PACs. [Laughter] Didn't even know what those--there weren't super PACs last time we ran. And the atmosphere of cynicism and nastiness and sometimes just plain foolishness seems to ratchet up each cycle.But ultimately, the outcome of this election is going to be up to you. I'll work hard. Michelle is out there. We're going after this thing. But if there's one thing we learned in 2008, no matter what the other side throws at us, when there are millions of voices calling for change, when you knock on enough doors and make enough phone calls and talk to your friends and neighbors, and when you decide it's time for change to happen, guess what, change happens. And that's the spirit that we're going to need again, only more so.If people ask you what this campaign is about, you tell them it's still about hope. You tell them it's still about change. You tell them it's still about ordinary people who believe in the face of great odds that we can make a difference in the life of this country.I still believe that. I still believe our politics isn't as divided as our politics suggest. I still believe that we've got more in common than the pundits tell us we do. We're not Democrats or Republicans first, we're Americans first. And I see it all across the country, wherever I travel: north, south, east, west, big cities, small towns. There's a core decency and practicality and common sense in the American people that makes me so determined to get this thing done.I still believe in you, and I hope you still believe in me. Because I told you in 2008, I may not be a perfect man, and I'm not a perfect President, but I'll always tell you what I think and where I stand. And I wake up every single day thinking about you and how I can make your lives better and your kids' lives better. And if you stick with me, if you march with me and campaign with me and work as hard as you did the last time, we're going to finish what we started in 2008. We're going to finish what we started in 2008. We're going to get this country moving. We're going to be going forward and remind the entire world just why it is the United States is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Denver! Thank you. Thank you so much. Everybody, please have a seat if you got a seat, just so the folks back there can--[laughter]. It is good to be back in Denver. Can everybody please give Tami a wonderful round of applause for that great introduction.There are some special guests here. You've heard from a bunch of them. I just want to acknowledge them, because they are outstanding public servants. First of all, one of the best Governors and one of the funniest Governors in the country, give it up for John Hickenlooper. One of the finest Lieutenant Governors--and according to Hickenlooper, and he's right, somebody much cooler than the Governor--the Lieutenant Governor, Joe Garcia, is here.Your outstanding mayor, Michael Hancock's in the house. Diana DeGette, great Congresswoman, is in the house. Jared Polis is here. And Ed Perlmutter is in the house. We've also got national cochair John Register here, and the former mayor of Denver, Wellington Webb, in the house.Plus, all of you are in the house, and I can tell you're fired up. We had some folks to get you fired up.Audience member. Ready to go!The President. And ready to go.Audience member. Si, se puede!The President. Now--si, se puede. That too.All right. Now, I'm here not just because I need your help, although I do need your help. [Laughter] I'm here because the country needs your help. Four years ago, we came together to reclaim the basic values that built this country, that built the largest middle class and the most prosperous economy in the world. And we came together because we believe that in America, your success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth. If you're willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job. If you're willing to meet your responsibilities, you should be able to own a home, maybe start a business, give your kids a chance to do better than you did, no matter who you are, no matter where you came from, no matter what you look like, no matter who you love.And the reason we came together in 2008, it wasn't--this wasn't about me. This was about us. We believed that the country was straying from these basic values. We had a record surplus that had been squandered on tax cuts for people who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them, two wars being waged on a credit card. Washington speculators were reaping huge profits by making bets with other people's money. Manufacturing was leaving our shores. So a shrinking number of Americans were doing fantastically well, while the vast majority--a growing number--were struggling to get by. Falling incomes, rising costs, the slowest job growth in a century, that's what we were confronting.And it was all a house of cards that collapsed in the most destructive crisis since the Great Depression. And just to give people a sense of perspective: In the last 6 months of 2008, even while we were campaigning, nearly 3 million of our neighbors lost their jobs; 800,000 lost their jobs the month I was sworn into office.So it was tough. But the good news is, Americans proved to be tougher. We don't quit. We keep on going. And together, we began to fight our way back.There were those who said we should let Detroit go bankrupt, but we met--we made a bet on the American worker, on the ingenuity of American companies, and now the auto industry is back on top of the world and manufacturing is starting to invest in America again. We've seen American manufacturing adding jobs for the first time since the 1990s.Business got back to basics. On the way over, the Governor and a couple of the Congressmen and I were talking about small businesses. And all those folks who were taking a chance, maybe they failed the first time, maybe even the second time, and then during this recession they were doing everything they had, maybe sometimes not taking any money out of the business themselves so they could keep their workers, who depended on those jobs, on the job. And it's because of folks like that that we've created over 4 million jobs in the last 26 months, more than 1 million of those in the last 6 months alone.Now, we're not satisfied. We're not satisfied when so many of our friends and family are still looking for work. We're not satisfied when neighbors have homes underwater. We're not satisfied when there are young people who are still looking for opportunity, States are still facing severe budget crunches, teachers are still being laid off, first-responders. A crisis this deep will not be solved overnight. Anybody who says it will aren't telling you the truth. We've got more work to do. And we know that.But we also know that the last thing we can afford to do after we've started to make progress, as we're starting to turn the corner, is a return to the policies--the very same policies--that got us into this mess in the first place. Not now. Not with so much at stake. We have come too far to abandon the change that we fought for over these past years. We're not going to make it happen.We have to move forward, to the future we imagined in 2008, where everybody gets a fair shot, everybody's doing their fair share, everybody's playing by the same set of rules. And that's the choice in this election. That's the reason I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America.Now, my opponent in this election, Governor Romney, is a patriotic American. He's raised a wonderful family. He should be proud of the great personal success he's had as the CEO of a large financial firm. But I think he's drawn the wrong lessons from his experience, because his working assumption is, if CEOs and wealthy investors like him get rich, then the rest of us automatically will too.When--there was a woman in Iowa who shared her stories of financial struggles, and he gave her an answer right out of an economic textbook. He said, ""Our productivity equals our income."" And the notion was that somehow the reason people can't pay their bills is because they're not working hard enough. If they got more productive, suddenly their incomes would go up. Well, those of us who've spent time in the real world--[laughter]--know that the problem isn't that the American people aren't productive enough; you've been working harder than ever. The challenge we face right now, and the challenge we've faced for over a decade, is that harder work has not led to higher incomes and bigger profits at the top haven't led to better jobs.And what Governor Romney doesn't seem to get is that a healthy economy doesn't just mean a few folks maximizing their profits through massive layoffs or busting unions. You don't make America stronger by shipping jobs and profits overseas. When you propose cutting your own taxes while raising them on 18 million working families, that's not a recipe for broad-based economic growth. And----Audience member. We need you, Barack!The President. ----it's true.Audience members. Yeah!The President. You know, I--and I need you! Look----Audience member. You got me! [Laughter]The President. There is nothing new about these ideas. It's the same old stuff they've been peddling for years. Though Bill Clinton pointed this out a few weeks ago: This time their agenda is on steroids. [Laughter] They want even bigger tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. They want even deeper cuts to things like education and Medicare and research and technology. They want to give banks and insurance companies even more power to do as they please.Governor Romney says that his 25 years in the private sector gives him a special understanding of how the economy works. Now, if that's true, I got to ask, why is he running around with the same bad ideas that brought our economy to collapse this last time out? I mean, either he thinks that they're going to lead to a different result this time, or he's hoping you won't remember what happened the last time. [Laughter] And I'm here to say we were there--[laughter]--we remember. We're not going back. We're moving forward. That's why I'm running for President again. Now, understand, we don't expect government to solve all our problems, and it shouldn't try. I learned from my mom, no education policy can take the place of a loving, attentive, and sometimes somewhat stern parent. [Laughter] When I was a young community organizer, I was working with Catholic churches, and they taught me that no government program can make as much of a difference as kindness and commitment on the part of neighbors and friends. Not every regulation is smart. Not every tax dollar is spent wisely. Your Governor, your mayor, your President, all of us are constantly looking for ways to make government smarter and to upgrade what we've been doing. A lot of the stuff we're doing now we were doing back in the thirties, forties, fifties, and sixties. We need to change some of this stuff.So we can't just be defending the status quo, we want to transform it, including how government works. Not every person can be helped who refuses to help themselves. But that's not an excuse to tell the vast majority of responsible, hard-working Americans, you're on your own; that unless you're lucky enough to have parents who can lend you money, you may not be able to go to college; that even if you pay your premiums every month, you may be out of luck if an insurance company decides to drop your coverage right when you need it most.That's not who we are. That's not how we built America. We built this country together. We built railroads and highways and the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge together. We sent my grandfather's generation back to college on the GI bill together. We didn't do these things because it was going to be just good for one person or just one group. We did it because we understood, you know what, if my neighbor, my friend, my colleague, my coworker, if they're getting a good education, then my business, my company, my community will thrive. All of us will do better.If we invest in building roads and bridges, all of us will do better. It will make all of us richer. All of us will have opportunity. Those previous generations understood, we move forward together, as one Nation and as one people. That's the true lesson of our past. And that's the right vision for our future. That's why I'm running for President.I'm running to make sure that by the end of this decade, more of our citizens hold a college degree than any other nation on Earth. I want to make sure our schools are hiring and rewarding the best teachers, especially in math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses are looking for right now.Higher education isn't a luxury, it's an economic imperative that every American should be able to afford. That's the choice in this election.I'm running to make sure that the next generation of high-tech manufacturing takes place in Denver and Cleveland and Pittsburgh and Charlotte. I don't want to reward businesses that are investing, creating jobs overseas. I want to reward them for investing right here in Colorado, creating jobs right here in the United States of America. That's the choice in this election.I'm running so that we can have control over our energy future. Our dependence on foreign oil is at its lowest point in 16 years. And by the middle of the next decade, our cars will average nearly 55 miles per gallon. Thousands of Americans have jobs because of the production of renewable energies here in Colorado and all across the country. And your Governor and your mayors have been leaders in this. Your congressional delegation, they understand now is not the time to cut these investments to pay for $4 billion a year in giveaways to the oil companies. Now's the time to end those subsidies on an industry that's rarely been more profitable. And let's invest in the future, let's invest in energy that has rarely been more promising for our economy and our security and the safety of our planet.That's why I'm running, Denver. That's the choice in this election.For the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. Usama bin Laden is no longer a threat to this country, and Al Qaida is on the path to defeat. We just came out of a NATO summit in Chicago in which all the countries participating, an international coalition, said the war in Afghanistan will end on 2014. It will be over, and we'll--we are going to be starting to bring our troops home. And we're going to do it in a way that is responsible and allows Afghans to take a greater lead for their own security.America is safer and more respected because of the courage and the selflessness of the U.S. Armed Forces. I was just at the Air Force Academy, shaking 1,100 hands--[laughter]--giving 1,100 salutes. And as long as I am Commander in Chief, this country will care for our veterans. We will care and serve our veterans the way they've served us, because no veteran should have to fight for a job when they come home or fight for a roof over their heads.That's why we're so proud we're building that VA hospital right here in Denver. And our congressional delegation helped to make that happen.My opponent has different ideas. He said it was ""tragic"" to end the war in Iraq, won't set a timeline for ending the war in Afghanistan. I have set a timeline. Our coalition partners and the Afghans agree with me. I intend to keep it. After a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives and over a trillion dollars, the nation we need to build is our own. We're going to use half of what we're no longer spending on the war to pay down our deficit, use the other half to invest in education and research and wireless networks and smart grids and broadband lines and new runways. And that's the choice in this election.And I'm running to pay down our debt in a way that is balanced and responsible. After inheriting a $1 trillion deficit, I signed $2 trillion of spending cuts into law. My opponent won't admit it, but it's been starting to appear in places--real liberal outlets like the Wall Street Journal--[laughter]--since I've been President, Federal spending has risen at the lowest pace in nearly 60 years. Think about that. Think about that.I'd just point out that it always goes up least under Democratic Presidents. This other side, I don't know how they've been bamboozling folks into thinking that they are the responsible, fiscally disciplined party. They run up these wild debts, and then when we take over, we got to clean it up. And they point and say, look how irresponsible they are. Look at the facts. Look at the numbers.And now I want to finish the job. I want to finish the job in a balanced way. Yes, we're going to streamline Government. There's more waste to be cut. We can reform our Tax Code so that it's simpler and fairer, but so that it also asks the wealthiest Americans to pay a little bit more.And let me say, my opponent, he won't tell us how he'd pay for his new $5 trillion tax cut. Now, this is a tax cut that gives an average of $250,000 to every millionaire in the country. This is on top of the Bush tax cuts. This is more. [Laughter] So I'd get more. I don't need more. And we know that the tax bill--or the bill for this tax cut, it's going to come from two places. Either it's passed on to our children, or it will pay--be paid for by a whole lot of ordinary Americans.And we're not going to let that happen again. We're not going to let another millionaire's tax cut get paid for by eliminating medical research projects into things like cancer or Alzheimer's. We're not going to pay for another tax cut by kicking more kids out of Head Start programs or asking students to pay more for college or eliminating health insurance for millions of poor and elderly and disabled Americans on Medicaid. And I'm not going to allow Medicare to be turned into a voucher that would end the program as we know it. We're not going to do that. We'll reform Medicare, not by shifting the cost of care to seniors, but by reducing the spending that isn't making people healthier.So that's what's at stake. On issue after issue, we can't afford to spend the next 4 years going backwards. We don't need to refight the battles over Wall Street reform; we just saw how much it's needed. We don't need to refight the battle over health care reform; Tami told you why it's needed. We've got 2.5 million young people who are on their parent's plan right now because of that bill, have health insurance who wouldn't otherwise have it. Millions of seniors who are seeing their prescription drug prices lower because it was the right thing to do. We're not going to go back to days when the insurance companies had unchecked power to cancel your policy or deny your coverage or charge women differently than men. We're not going back there.We certainly don't need another political fight about ending a woman's right to choose or get rid of Planned Parenthood or taking away affordable birth control. I want women to control their own health choices, just like I want my daughters to have the same opportunities as your sons. We're not turning back the clock. We won't do that.We're not going back to the days when you could be kicked out of the United States military because of who you are and who you love. We're moving forward to a country where every American is treated with dignity and respect and equality. That's what we're moving towards.We need to put an end to another election where multimillion-dollar donations speak louder than the voices of ordinary citizens.We need to move forward so that we can stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they're the children of undocumented immigrants. This is a country that is at its best when we harness the God-given talents of every individual, when we hear every voice, when we come together as one American family, and we're striving for the same dream.That's what we're fighting for. That's why I'm running for President. That's why I need your help. This election will be closer than the last one. People don't remember the last election was close. [Laughter] We're going to have to contend with even more negative ads, even more cynicism and nastiness, and just plain foolishness. But the outcome of the election is ultimately going to depend on all of you.Audience member. We'll just have to work harder!The President. That's exactly right. [Laughter] Because if there's one thing I learned in 2008, there's nothing more powerful than millions of voices calling for change. When you guys are knocking on doors, when you're picking up phone call--phones and calling your friends and talking to your neighbors and your coworkers, when you decide it's time for change to happen, well, guess what, it happens. Change comes to America. And that's the spirit we need again. That's the spirit we need again.I took some pictures with some folks before I came out here, and one of the first pictures I took was with a couple of gentlemen--these two right here--90 years old. They were U.S. Olympians in 1938, with Jesse Owens, their friend. [Applause] They can get up. They can stand up; these gentlemen right here--[applause]--1938. Think about that; 1938--'48, excuse me. I'm sorry. I'm making them even older--[laughter]--1948.And so we were talking about all the changes they've seen, everything that's happened in their lifetimes. And I was just imagining what the world looked like then and, because in part of the example they set, what the world looks like now. And then, one of my last pictures--in fact, the last picture I took was with a baby--where's Barrett--who was drooling on my--[laughter]--there he is right there. All right, so I got the drool all over me, all over me--[laughter]. Now--and I started imagining what the world will look like for him 50 years from now and all the changes he's going to see.And those stories are bound together. That little baby, these two handsome gentlemen, they're part of that same story of who we are as Americans, and they understand that we're bound together. And if people ask you what this campaign is about, you tell them it's about these gentlemen and it's about that baby. [Laughter] You tell them it's about hope. You tell them it's still about change. You tell them it's still about ordinary people who believe in each other, who believe we have more in common than anything that drives us apart, who believe that in the face of great odds, we can make a difference in the life of this country.I still believe. I believe--I am absolutely convinced--we're not as divided as our politics suggest right now. I still believe we've got more in common than the pundits tell us. We're not Democrats or Republicans first; we're Americans first. That's what I believe.And so you should all know I still believe in you, and I'm asking you to believe in me. Because, as I told you in 2008, I'm not a perfect man, and I'll never be a perfect President, but I told you I'd always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you where I stood, and I'd always wake up every single day fighting as hard as I can for you. And I have kept that promise. And I will keep that promise as long as I have the honor of being your President.So if you'll fight with me and stick with me and march with me and press with me, if you're willing to work even harder this time than the last time, we'll move this country forward. We will finish what we started. We'll remind the world again why the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, Denver. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Iowa! I don't know about you, but I'm feeling fired up! I am definitely ready to go! Definitely ready to go. We just had a chance to talk to the folks in the overflow, and before that, we were in Newton. And I was just telling my team, there's something about coming to Iowa, it just gets me going! It's my home away from home. Just love this place! Even just all those long drives. [Laughter] Seeing all that corn makes me feel good.So listen, I want to thank a couple of Iowa friends of mine. First of all, your outstanding former Governor and now outstanding Secretary of Agriculture, Tom Vilsack is in the house. Your mayor, Frank Cownie, is here; your Congressman, Leonard Boswell; your attorney general and one of my campaign cochairs, Tom Miller; your State treasurer and one of my earliest supporters, Mike Fitzgerald.And I also want to thank some folks who've been keeping us fired up from the very beginning, the Isiserettes, who are in the house. We were talking about when we had the J-J dinner, we were all going in together, and the Isiserettes were at the front, and Michelle and I were dancing--she was dancing, I was trying to dance. [Laughter]So it's good to be back. It's good to be back among friends. It's good to be seeing all of you. You know, 4 or 5 years ago, it was you who kept us going when a lot of pundits in Washington had written us off. You remember that. It was on your front porches, it was in your backyards where our movement for change began.Audience member. We love you, Mr. President!The President. I love you back.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. You know, it was here where we came together to reclaim the basic bargain that built the largest middle class and the most prosperous nation on Earth. We believe that in America success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth. If you're willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job. If you're willing to meet your responsibilities, you should be able to own a home, maybe start a business. You should be able to give your children a better chance than you had, no matter where you came from, no matter what you look like, no matter who you love. That's what we believe.And we came together in 2008 because you could tell that our country--or at least the leadership in Washington--had strayed away from these basic values. We had a record surplus that had been squandered on tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. Two wars had been waged on a credit card. Wall Street speculators were reaching huge profits, making bets with other people's money, but it was destabilizing our financial system. Manufacturing was moving offshore. A shrinking number of Americans were doing fantastically well, but a whole lot of people were struggling with falling incomes and rising costs and the slowest job growth in half a century.And it was a house of cards, and we sensed that. And then right in the middle of the campaign we saw the most destructive crisis since the Great Depression. In the last 6 months of 2008, while we were still campaigning, nearly 3 million of our neighbors lost their jobs; 800,000 lost their jobs the month I was sworn in. Hadn't seen anything like it since the Great Depression.And so it was tough. But it turned out Americans were tougher. Folks in Iowa were tougher. We don't quit. We keep going. And together, we're fighting our way back.So, when some said we should just let Detroit go bankrupt, we put our money on American workers and the ingenuity of American companies. And today, plants are adding new workers and new shifts, and the American auto industry is firing on all cylinders. Our manufacturers started investing in America again; first time we consistently added manufacturing jobs since the 1990s.Businesses started getting back to the basics, creating over 4 million new jobs in the last 26 months, more than 1 million in the last 6 months alone. Here in Iowa, farmers, food producers, manufacturers, renewable energy producers, they're all driving new job growth, showing the resilience and strength of our rural economies.Now, are we satisfied? Of course not. We've still got friends out there, and family, who are looking for work. All across America there are homes that are still underwater, too many small businesses still struggling to get financing. States are still laying off teachers and first-responders.This was a deep crisis; it didn't happen overnight. And we never thought it was going to be solved overnight. We know we have more work to do. But we also know that the last thing we can afford to do is to return to the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. Not now. Not with so much at stake. We have come too far to abandon the change that we fought for over these past few years. We've got to move forward. We can't go backward. We've got to move forward.That's the choice in this election. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States: to move this country forward.Now, my opponent in this election, Governor Romney, is a patriotic American. He's raised a wonderful family. He should be proud of the great personal success he's had as a CEO of a large financial firm. There are plenty of good and honest people in that industry, and there's an important, creative role for it in the free market.But Governor Romney has made his experience as a financial CEO the entire rationale of his candidacy for President. Now, he doesn't really talk about what he did in Massachusetts. But he does talk about being a business guy. Right? He says this gives him a special understanding of what it takes to create jobs and grow the economy, even if he's unable to offer a single new idea about how to do that. No matter how many times he's asked about it, he says he knows how to do it. So I think it's a good idea to look at the way he sees the economy.Now, the main goal of a financial firm like Governor Romney's is not to create jobs. And by the way, the people who work at these firms will tell you that's not their goal. Their main goal is to create wealth for themselves and their investors. That's part of the American way. That's fine.Sometimes, jobs are created in that process. But when maximizing short-term gains for your investors rather than building companies that last is your goal, then sometimes it goes the other way: workers get laid off, benefits disappear, pensions are cut, factories go dark. In some cases, companies are loaded up with debt, not to make the companies more productive, not to buy new equipment to keep them at the cutting edge, but just to pay investors. Companies may go bankrupt as a result. Taxpayers may be on the hook to help out on those pensions. Investors walk off with big returns, and working folks get stuck holding the bag.Now, that may be the job of somebody who's engaged in corporate buyouts. That's fine. But that's not the job of a President. That's not the President's job. There may be value for that kind of experience, but it's not in the White House.See, the job of a President is to lay the foundation for strong and sustainable broad-based growth, not one where a small group of speculators are cashing in on short-term gains. It's to make sure that everybody in this country gets a fair shake, everybody gets a fair shot, everybody is playing by the same set of rules.When you're the President, your job is to look out for the investor and the worker, for the big companies and the small companies, for the health of farmers and small-business people and the nurse and the teacher. You're supposed to be thinking about everybody and the health of the middle class and what the future is going to hold for our kids. That's how I see the economy.Of course, the worldview that Governor Romney gained from his experience as a financial CEO explains something. It explains why the last time he visited these very same fairgrounds, he famously declared that corporations are people. ""Human beings, my friends""--that's what he said. That's what he called them: ""Human beings, my friends.""It also explains why, when a woman right here in Iowa shared the story of her financial struggles, he gave her an answer out of an economics textbook. He said, ""Our productivity equals our income."" Well--as if she'd have an easier time making it if she would just work harder.Now, let me tell you something. We believe in the profit motive. We believe that risk takers and investors should be rewarded. That's what makes our economy so dynamic. But we also believe everybody should have opportunity. We believe--[applause]--we think everybody who makes the economy more productive or a company more productive should benefit. And the problem with our economy isn't that the American people aren't productive enough; you're working harder than ever. Productivity is through the roof. It's been going up consistently over the last decade. The challenge we face right now, the challenge we've faced for over a decade, is that harder work hasn't led to higher incomes. Bigger profits haven't led to better jobs. And you can't solve that problem if you can't even see that it's a problem.And he doesn't see it's a problem. And so this experience explains why he is proposing the exact same policies that we already tried in the last decade, the very policies that got us into this mess. He sincerely believes that if CEOs and wealthy investors are getting rich, then the wealth is going to trickle down and the rest of us are going to do well too. And he is wrong.You don't build a strong economy by proposing more tax cuts for corporations that ship jobs and profits overseas. But that's his plan. You don't build a strong economy by repealing the rules that are designed to prevent another taxpayer bailout of Wall Street banks. But that's what he pledges to do, roll those things back. You don't build a strong economy by offering another budget-busting tax cut skewed to the wealthiest Americans, while raising taxes on 18 million working families. But that's what he's proposing.And then, he and his folks, they've got the nerve to go around saying they're somehow going to bring down the deficit. Economists who have looked at his plan say it would swell our deficits by trillions of dollars, even with the drastic cuts he's called for in things like education and agriculture and Medicare, even with the drastic cuts to the basic research and technology that have always been the strength of the American economy. He promises to do that on day one. We don't need that. That's a vision that's going backwards. We're going forwards.We're going forward. We're not going to double down on the same bad ideas that we've tried over the last decade. It's not as if we haven't tried these things. We tried them. They didn't work. We're not going to listen to folks who argue that somehow this time it's going to be different. I'm here to tell you we were there when we tried them. We remember. We're not going back. We're moving this country forward.And I want to make clear here, it's not like Democrats don't have work to do. We've got work to do. Government--we have to acknowledge government can't solve all our problems, and it shouldn't try. I learned from my mom no education policy can take the place of a parent's love and attention, and sometimes a scolding when you didn't do your homework. As a young man, when I was working as a community organizer with Catholic churches, they taught me no poverty program can make as much of a difference as neighbors coming together and working together with kindness and commitment.Not every regulation is smart, not every tax dollar is spent wisely, not every person can be helped who refuses to help themselves. But that's not an excuse to tell the vast majority of hard-working, responsible Americans they're on their own; that unless you're lucky to have parents who can lend you the money, you may not be able to go to college; that even if you pay your premiums every month, you may be out of luck if an insurance company decides to drop your coverage just when you need it most.That's not who we are, Iowa. That's not how we built America. We built this country together. The Hoover Dam, the Golden Gate Bridge, GI bill, the Moon landing, the Internet, we did those things together. Not to make some small group rich, not to make--help any single individual, but because we knew that if we made those investments it would provide a framework, a platform for everybody to do well, for everybody to succeed. That's the true lesson of our past. That's the right vision for our future. And that's why I'm running for President of the United States.I'm running to make sure that by the end of this decade, more of our citizens hold a college degree than any other nation on Earth. I want to help our schools hire and reward the best teachers, especially in math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn skills that local businesses are looking for right now. Higher education can't be a luxury; it is a necessity, and I want everybody to be able to afford it. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President.I'm running to make sure the next generation of high-tech innovation and manufacturing takes root in places like Des Moines and Newton and Waterloo. I want to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs and profits overseas. I want to reward companies that are creating jobs and bringing jobs back here to the United States of America. That's the choice in this election.I'm running so we can keep moving forward to a future where we control our own energy. Our dependence on foreign oil is at the lowest point it's been in 16 years. By the middle of the next decade, our cars will average nearly 55 miles per gallon. Thousands of Americans have jobs--including here in Iowa--because the production of renewable energy has nearly doubled in just 3 years in this country.Now is not the time to cut these investments just to keep giving billions in tax giveaways to oil companies. They've never been more profitable. Now is the time to double down on biofuels and solar and wind, clean energy that's never been more promising for our economy and our security and for the safety of the planet. That's the choice in this election, Iowa.You know, for the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. Usama bin Laden is no longer a threat to this country. Al Qaida is on the path to defeat, and by 2014, the war in Afghanistan will be over.And all this was made possible because of the courage and selflessness of our men and women in uniform, which is why, on Memorial Day, we're going to remember them. And I'm going to actually be talking especially about our Vietnam vets. Because they weren't honored the way they were supposed to when they came home, and we're not going to make that mistake again. So, as long as I'm Commander in Chief, this country will care for our veterans and serve them as well as they've served us. Because no one who fights for this country should have to fight for a job, or a roof over their heads when they come home. That's why I'm running for President.My opponent has got a different view. He said it was ""tragic"" to end the war in Iraq. He won't set a timeline to end the war in Afghanistan. And I have and I intend to keep it, because after a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives and over a trillion dollars, the nation we need to build is our own. So I want to use--[applause]--so we're going to use half of what we're no longer spending on war to pay down our deficit and the rest to invest in education and research, to repair our roads and bridges, our runways, our wireless networks. That's the choice in this election, Iowa.I'm running to pay down our debt in a way that's balanced and responsible. Now, I know Governor Romney came to Des Moines last week; warned about a ""prairie fire of debt."" That's what he said: ""Prairie fire."" [Laughter] But he left out some facts. His speech was more like a cow pie of distortion. [Laughter] I don't know whose record he twisted the most, mine or his. [Laughter]Now, listen, the debt and the deficit are serious problems, and it is true that the depth of the recession added to the debt. A lot more folks were looking for unemployment insurance. A lot fewer folks were paying taxes because they weren't making money, so that added to the debt. Our efforts to prevent it from becoming a depression--helping the auto industry, making sure that not as many teachers were laid off--all those things added to the debt.But what my opponent didn't tell you was that Federal spending since I took office has risen at the slowest pace of any President in almost 60 years. By the way, what generally happens--what happens is, the Republicans run up the tab, and then we're sitting there and they've left the restaurant, and then they point and--""Why did you order all those steaks and martinis?"" [Laughter] What he did not also tell you was that after inheriting a trillion-dollar deficit, I signed $2 trillion of spending cuts into law. So now I want to finish the job: yes, by streamlining Government--we've got more work to do; yes, by cutting more waste, but also by reforming our Tax Code so that it is simpler and fairer and so that it asks the wealthiest Americans to pay a little bit more.Oh, by the way, something else he didn't mention, something else he didn't tell you: He hasn't told you how he'd paid for a new $5 trillion tax cut which includes a 25-percent tax cut for nearly every millionaire in the country. Five trillion in new tax cuts: That is like trying to put out a prairie fire with some gasoline.So we're not going to do that. I refuse to let that happen to our country. We're not going to pay for another millionaire's tax cut by eliminating medical research that's helping people with cancer and Alzheimer's disease. We're not going to pay for it by shortchanging farmers in rural America. We're not going to pay for it by kicking some kids out of Head Start or asking students to pay more for college or eliminating health insurance for millions of poor and elderly and Americans on disabilities who are all on Medicaid.And as long as I'm President, we're not going to allow Medicare to be turned into a voucher that would end the program as we know it. We're going to reform Medicare not by shifting the cost of care to seniors; that's easy to do, but it's wrong. We're going to reform it by reducing the actual costs of health care, reducing the spending that doesn't make people healthier. That's the right thing to do. That's what at stake, Iowa. That's why I'm running for reelection.On issue after issue, we can't afford to spend the next 4 years just going backwards. We don't need to refight the battle we just had over Wall Street reform. That was the right thing to do. We've seen how important it is. We don't need to refight the battle we just had over health care reform. Having 2.5 million young people stay on their parents' health insurance, that was the right thing to do. Cutting prescription drug costs for seniors, right thing to do. We're not going to go back to the days when insurance companies had unchecked power to cancel your policies or deny you coverage or charge women differently than men. We're not going back to that.We don't need another political fight about ending a woman's right to choose or getting rid of Planned Parenthood or taking away affordable birth control. We don't need that. I want women to control their own health choices, just like I want my daughters to have the same economic opportunities as my sons. We're not turning back the clock. We're not going backwards.We're not going back to the days when you could be kicked out of the military just because of who you are and who you love. We're moving forward as a country, where everybody is treated with dignity and respect--moving forward.We're not going to just stand back while $10 million checks are speaking louder than the voices of ordinary citizens in our elections. We recognize that's a problem.And it's time to stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they're the children of undocumented immigrants. Look, you know what, this country is at its best when we harness the God-given talents of every individual, when we hear every voice, when we come together as one American family all striving for the same American Dream. That's what we're fighting for. That's why I'm running for a second term. That's why I need your help.You know, let me say this, this election is going to be even closer than the last one. And by the way, the last one was close. People don't remember, it was close. Everybody remembers Grant Park. It was close. We're going to have to contend with even more negative ads. We've got these super PACs and shadowy special interests, like the ones you've been bombarded with. You guys just got hit here in Iowa. We'll have to overcome more cynicism and nastiness and just some plain foolishness even more than we did the last time.But the outcome of this election, it's entirely up to you. I'm going to be working hard. Michelle is out there working hard. But there's one thing we learned in 2008: There's nothing more powerful than millions of voices calling for change. Michelle and I, we were talking the other night over dinner, and I told her we were coming back to Iowa, and she said something--it's absolutely true--she said, I remember back in the first campaign, we would be reading all these news reports and watching the news, and everything looked terrible and everybody was counting us out. And then I'd come to Iowa, and I'd see what was going on on the ground, and I'd be meeting people and talking to people. It wasn't necessarily that it was a sure thing that we were going to win. But what was being reflected out there, that wasn't what was happening here. That wasn't what ordinary folks were thinking.So she just stopped watching TV or at least the news part of it. She still watches HGTV and some other things--""Dancing With the Stars."" [Laughter] But this place taught us that not that we're always right, not that we don't make mistakes, but that there's just a core decency and strength and resilience to the American people, and that ultimately, the conversations that are going around on kitchen tables and at the VFW hall and in churches, that those conversations aren't what's reflected in the cable news.And so when I look out at this crowd, all these different faces--different ages, different races, different faiths--I'm reminded of that. And when enough of you knock on enough doors and pick up enough phones and talk to your friends or your neighbors and your coworkers--and you're doing it respectfully and you're talking to folks who don't agree with you, you're talking to people who are good people, but maybe they don't have all the information--when you make that happen, when you decide it's time for change to happen, you know what, change happens. Change comes to America.It's always easier to be cynical. It's always easier to say nothing can change, especially after we've gone through such a tough time. And despite all the changes we've made, despite all the good things we've done, things are still tough. And so the other side, they are going to try and play on that sense that, well, things aren't perfect, Congress is still arguing, the politics is still polarized. But you're the antidote to that. And that's the spirit we need again.So, if people ask you what this campaign is about, you tell them, yes, it's still about hope. It is still about change. It's still about ordinary folks who believe that in the face of great odds, we can make a difference in the life of this country. Don't let them tell you different.You proved it in 2008. Without you--I look around this place, I see folks who were out there knocking on doors and making things happen--I would not have had the privilege of being your President. You were the first ones to make this country believe we could still come together around a common purpose. And I still believe that today.I still believe that we're not as divided as our politics suggest. I still believe we have more in common than the experts tell us. I still believe we're not Democrats or Republicans first, we are Americans first. I still believe in you. And I want you to keep believing in me.Some of you remember--because I've spent a lot of time here, I used to go around and I would tell you--I warned you, and if you weren't listening, Michelle would tell you, I'm not a perfect man, and I wouldn't be a perfect President. But what I told you was, I promised you I would always tell you what I thought and I'd always tell you where I stood, even when it politically wasn't convenient. And I would wake up every single day, fighting as hard as I know how for you and your families and your children's future.And, Iowa, I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise, and I will keep it as long as I have the honor of being your President. So if you're willing to stick with me and fight with me and press on with me, and if you're willing to work even harder than you did the last time, we will move this country forward and we will finish what we started. And we'll remind the world just why it is America is the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you. Well, it is good to be back in Minnesota. I want to, first of all, say thank you to your outstanding Governor, Mark Dayton. We are proud of him. I had the extraordinary honor of serving with Mark when I first arrived in the Senate, and I know he's really sorry not to still be in the Senate. [Laughter] But he did a great job then, and he's doing a great job now, because he's passionate about people and wanting to make sure that they have opportunity. And so we're really grateful to him. And I know you guys are very pleased that the Vikings are staying here in Minnesota. [Laughter] That is a priority.I don't know--is R.T. still here? Your mayor was here a while--he was. I love him too, so just--[laughter]--you let him know that. R.T. is one of my dearest friends. He was actually part of the ""draft Obama"" movement, a very early supporter. Even before I was a supporter, or Michelle was a supporter, R.T. was a supporter. [Laughter] So I love him.It is wonderful to be back here and to see the great work that Mark's doing and R.T. and your Senators and your congressional delegation.As Mark mentioned, we've gone through, these past 3 1/2, 4 years, as tough a period in our country's history as anything in our lifetime, certainly anything since the 1930s. And we're not out of the woods yet. We've still got work to do. There's still far too many people than we want who are out there looking for work, too many people whose homes are still underwater. But as Mark indicated, what we have tried to do for the last 3 1/2, 4 years is just to make dogged progress, to just be persistent, to just stay at it.And because of that, we were able to ensure that we didn't plunge into a full-blown depression when we first came into office. We were able to make sure that the financial system stabilized. People forget, the month that I took office we had lost 800,000 jobs in that month alone----[At this point, a baby cried.]The President. Yes, it was terrible! [Laughter] And we had lost 3 million jobs even before I was inaugurated. And so slowly, by making sure that the Recovery Act allowed teachers and firefighters to stay on the job, by making sure the projects all across the country got started to rebuild our roads and our bridges and projects that needed to get done, by making sure that everybody had a little more money in their pockets with tax cuts for the middle class--98 percent of workers--because of all those steps, the economy started to stabilize.And then it started to move forward, and businesses started to invest again. And we made a commitment to double our exports. And so suddenly people were thinking about not just how much we consume, but what do we produce, what do we make, which is at the heart of who we are as Americans. How can we continue to innovate? How can we continue to adapt to this rapidly changing global economy?So we're not there yet, but the good news is, we've made enormous strides over these last 3 1/2 years. But the reason that some of you worked so hard back in 2008, the reason I decided to run for office, wasn't just to deal with the immediate crisis. It was also to address problems that had been lingering for decades that we hadn't taken care of. For decades, we had had a health care system that was broken and getting more and more expensive, providing less and less quality care to everybody, and was becoming increasingly unaffordable, not just for individual families, but also for businesses and for our Government.For decades, we hadn't had an energy policy. So not only were we polluting the planet, but we were also finding ourselves sending billions of dollars to other countries because of our dependence on foreign oil.For decades, we had seen manufacturing leave our shores and losing the competition when it came to trade around the world. For decades, our education system was working really well for a few, but for a lot of our young people, they weren't being equipped with the skills that they needed to compete.And so what we've been fighting for is not just to right the ship short term, it's also to make sure that over the long term we're building an economy that can last, an economy with a firm foundation.That's why we tackled health care, so that we can make sure that 30 million people are able to get access to insurance, but also so that we can start bending the cost curve because that's the primary contributor to our deficit.That's why we took on education and said we're going to give more money in exchange for more reform, making schools accountable, but also making sure we're not just teaching to the test, making sure that we're unleashing the creativity and all the possibilities of good teachers working with inspired students.That's why we made sure that college was more affordable, and we took tens of billions of dollars that were previously going to banks and made sure that that money was going directly to our students to help them pay for college education.That's why we invested in clean energy so that we've actually doubled clean energy production in this country. And while oil and gas production are up higher than they've been in 8 years, our dependence on foreign oil is actually down as low as we've seen in almost a decade--under 50 percent--and we were able to get a doubling of fuel efficiency standards on cars, which means that sometime halfway in the next decade we're going to have cars that get 55 miles to a gallon, and everybody's car will get 55 miles to a gallon. And that's going to save consumers thousands of dollars, but it's also going to make sure that we're taking a whole bunch of carbon out of the atmosphere.So, on each of these fronts, what we've tried to do is deal with the immediate challenges in front of us, but also think long term.Now, throughout this process, the other side's had a different vision. My hope, when I came into office, was that we would have Republicans and Democrats coming together because the Nation was facing extraordinary challenges. It turns out that wasn't their approach, to put it mildly. [Laughter] Their approach, in part, was that if we can beat Obama, then that should be our primary focus. But there was also a philosophical difference, because their vision is one in which if a few are doing very well at the top, then that's somehow good for everybody. And what I tried to point out to them was that throughout our history, when we've done well, the reason we became an economic superpower was because we created a platform where everybody can succeed, where everybody is getting a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same rules.And so a lot of the tussles that we've had over the last 3 1/2 years have had to do with this difference in vision, and it will be coming to a head in this election. We're going to have as stark a contrast as we've seen in a very long time between the two candidates. I mean, 2008 was a significant election, obviously. But John McCain believed in climate change. [Laughter] John believed in campaign finance reform. He believed in immigration reform. I mean, there were some areas where you saw some overlap.In this election, the Republican Party has moved in a fundamentally different direction. The center of gravity for their party has shifted. And so things that we used to be able to take for granted, it's been more difficult to take for granted over the last 3 1/2 years.And let's just take one example: deficit reduction. We have a significant long-term debt that has to be dealt with. Now, our top priority should be putting people to work right now, because if our economy is growing faster, that actually will help reduce the deficit. But there's no doubt that it's unsustainable for us to keep on having health care costs in Medicare and Medicaid go up 6, 8, 10 percent, when the overall inflation rate and growth rate are coming in lower. That's a recipe for long-term disaster.So what we've said is, look, let's cut out waste, let's streamline programs, let's reorganize Government where we can. Let's end the war in Iraq. Let's wind down the war in Afghanistan. Let's use some of those savings for deficit reduction. Let's tackle Medicare and Medicaid in an intelligent way that preserves this critical social safety net, but also achieves significant savings. And let's ask those of us who've been most fortunate, just to pay a little bit more. And if we put that package together, we can achieve $4 trillion of savings and we can pay right now to rebuild our roads and our bridges and rehire some teachers and grow the economy right now. We can package that together to make progress.And we couldn't get them to take yes for an answer, because, ideologically, the notion of billionaires and millionaires paying a little bit more in taxes didn't adhere to the philosophy that they've been fighting for over the last several years.Now, I believe that if we're successful in this election--when we're successful in this election--that the fever may break, because there's a tradition in the Republican Party of more common sense than that. My hope and my expectation is that after the election, now that it turns out the goal of beating Obama doesn't make much sense because I'm not running again--[laughter]--that we can start getting some cooperation again and we're not going to have people raising their hands and saying--or refusing to accept a deal where there's $10 of cuts for every dollar of tax increases, but that people will accept a balanced plan for deficit reduction.My expectation is, is that we can get a highway transportation bill done that puts people back to work right now and rebuilds our infrastructure to succeed over the long term.My hope and expectation is, is that they'll recognize we need immigration reform because we're a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. And it actually is better for our economy, and by the way, it saves us money if all those folks who are working underground are above ground and paying taxes. It's actually good for our economy.My expectation is, is that if we can break this fever, that we can invest in clean energy and energy efficiency, because that's not a partisan issue, that's a sensible approach to making sure that our economy is going forward and we have control over it over the long term.So, so much is at stake in this election. And Minnesota is going to be important, and all of you are going to be critically important to that process. This is going to be a very close race. It's not a close race actually because the other side has a whole bunch of great ideas--they don't. [Laughter] They are just churning out the same ideas that we saw in the decade before I took office: the same ideas, the same you're-on-your-own philosophy, the same tax cuts and deregulation agenda that helped get us into this mess in the first place. But it's going to be close because there are a lot of folks out there who are still having a tough time and the economy is still fragile.And right now our biggest challenge is the situation not here in the United States, but coming overseas. I mean, Europe is having a significant crisis, in part because they haven't taken as many of the decisive steps as were needed to deal with the challenge. And that's weakening Asia, and that means it's harder for our exporters. All this stuff makes a difference in a global economy.So it's going to be close. And that means that we're going to have to be working just as hard and we have to be just as passionate, we have to be just as committed, just as excited as we were the last time.Now, admittedly, I'm grayer now. [Laughter] And so--and I've been President for a while, so you know, you're never as cool as you were that first time. [Laughter] Right? But I tell you, I am still so absolutely convinced in America's future. I travel a lot around the world, and when you ask folks where they look to for leadership, it is still the United States of America.When they think about what country embodies universal aspirations, they still talk about the United States of America. And there is not a country on Earth that wouldn't trade places with us, because we still have the best workers in the world. We still have the best universities in the world. We still have the best scientists and the best innovation in the world. We've got the best free market and the most dynamic entrepreneurs in the world.Ironically, the--some of the very things that the Republicans don't like are part of what makes our free market so strong, because the rules we put in place for transparency and accountability and consumer protection means our products are better and our investments are safer. And that's the reason why money rushes here when we've got problems all around the world--is precisely because there are rules in place that everybody is supposed to abide by.And so we've got all the tools to make the 21st century an American century just like the 20th century was. And the question is, are we going to seize it? And that's where all of you come in. This little guy who has been eating his feet the whole time I've been talking--[laughter]--when I think about why I ran for office, I think about Malia and Sasha.Audience member. Henry.The President. ----and Henry. [Laughter] And what's your name?Audience member. Dmitry.The President. Dmitry. I think about them and what kind of country are we leaving for them.The truth is, probably, our kids in this restaurant are going to be okay. We've been incredibly blessed, most of us. We've been incredibly lucky. But the quality of their lives will also depend on whether every other child in America has got a shot, whether they're doing well, whether they feel invested in the American Dream.Now, it doesn't do us any good if our kids are succeeding, but the environment is ruined. They can't protect themselves from that. It's not going to do much good if they're doing very well, but they're having to drive on dilapidated roads and bridges and their airports don't work and broadband lines are better someplace else and innovation has taken place somewhere else. I don't want them ever to have to think about moving to someplace else to have more opportunity. That's what we fight for.So I used to say, back in 2008, I'm not a perfect man, and I won't be a perfect President. But I promised I would always tell people what I thought, I'd always tell people where I stood, and I would fight as hard as I could to make sure that Henry and Malia and Sasha and Dmitry and our kids have a better future. And I've kept that promise.And the reason I've been able to keep that promise is because I get a chance in this job to meet Americans from every walk of life, and I travel all across the country. And what I said in that first speech I made on the national stage I still believe, which is: Black, White, Asian, Hispanic, Native American, gay, straight, disabled or not, we're one people. And the decency and strength and resilience of the American people, it comes shining through every place I go: in VFW halls, in a small business, in teachers who I meet, and firefighters and our incredible men and women in uniform.This is a country full of good people who want to do the right thing, and they deserve a government who reflects that decency. That's what we've tried to give them, and that's what we're going to keep on giving them for the next 5 years.So thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hey, Chicago! Thank you. Ah, it is good to be back home. I am sleeping in my bed tonight. I'm going to go into my kitchen; I might cook something for myself. [Laughter] Putter around in the backyard a little bit. It's good being home. White House is nice, but I'm just leasing. [Laughter]I--it is so good to see so many great friends. But I just have to point out the person who introduced me. He was one of the best Chiefs of Staff that you could ever want to have. He would be in the White House at 5 or 6; he'd leave there at 7 or 8. He'd take work home with him. He'd be there on the weekends, sacrifices, all the stuff that he did. But as good as he was at being a Chief of Staff, I have never seen him happier than he is as Mayor of the City of Chicago.He loves Chicago. He loves its people. He loves its institutions. He loves its kids. And so all the work that he is doing on behalf of making the schools better and streamlining government and making things work in every part of the city and not just some parts of the city, that's all reflective--all that energy, all that pent-up energy--[laughter]--that's reflective of his love of the city. So I just wanted to give--everybody to give a big round of applause to an outstanding Mayor, Rahm Emanuel.So I'm here because not only do I need your help, but your country needs your help. So some of you have known me since I was running for the State senate. There were folks who saw me lose a congressional race and saw me win a U.S. Senate race. And I know you, and I know your values, and I know what you care about. And as much as we may have had friendships and relationships--and that's part of the reason you supported me in 2008--the election 4 years ago wasn't just about me; it wasn't about one person. It was about our commitments to each other. It was about core, basic beliefs we had in America and America's future.We believed that everybody should have a fair shot and everybody should do their fair share and everybody should play by the same set of rules. We believed that if you're willing to work hard, if you're willing to take responsibility, if you're willing to be part of a community, then it doesn't matter what you look like, where you come from, what your last name is, who you love, the bottom line is that you should be able to make it in America. That's what this city is all about. That's reflective of this city. You've got surnames from everywhere in Chicago--not just Obamas--because this has been a magnet for people who say, if I work hard, I can make it.Audience member. I love you, Obama.Audience members. Aww.The President. Hi. [Laughter] One of my younger friends was there.And that's why we came together in 2008, because we felt as if, for a decade, those values were being betrayed or at least we weren't living up to them. We had seen a surplus turned into a deficit--massive deficits--because folks got tax cuts who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them, two wars run on a credit card, first time in our history where we cut taxes while sending young men and women off to fight.We had seen an economic system that was dependent on financial speculation and frankly a lot of recklessness. We had seen manufacturing move overseas. We became known as the country that was consuming things. We were the engine of the world economy because of what we bought on credit cards or on home equity loans, instead of what we had previously been known as, a country that made things and sold them all around the world with those three proud words: Made in America.And all this came tumbling down in a financial crisis that really began to happen just as we were still in the midst of the campaign. So, before I took office, we had lost 3 million jobs. The month I took office, we lost 800,000 jobs, 8 million all told before our economic policies had a chance to take effect. And so we had to make a series of tough decisions quickly. We had to make sure that an iconic auto industry was saved. We had to make sure that the banking system was stabilized. We had to make sure that teachers' layoffs were minimized and States got some help and middle class families got tax cuts.And because of those decisions, we were able to stabilize the economy and begin to grow again, because we had faith in the American people. Most of those decisions weren't easy. We knew we'd be subject to political criticism, but they were the right thing to do for our country. And despite all the noise and the misinformation and the obfuscation and bamboozling--[laughter]--that you hear, what we did worked to help make sure that the economy began to grow again, so that we have now seen over 2 years of the economy growing and jobs being produced, more than 4 million jobs produced, over 800,000 produced just this year alone.Now, here's the thing, though: We're not where we need to be. We're not there yet. We saw that in today's jobs report. Yes, a lot of that is attributable to Europe and the cloud that's coming over from the Atlantic, and the whole world economy is--has been weakened by it. And it's having an impact on us. But beyond that, we still know too many of our friends and family who are out of work. And there are too many folks whose homes are still underwater, too many people still struggling to pay the bills, too many kids still locked out of opportunity.And when we embarked on this journey in 2008, it wasn't just to get back to where we were before the financial crisis. The idea was to start fixing things in a more fundamental way: to make sure that every child in America gets a good education, to make sure people aren't bankrupt when they get sick, to make sure we've actually got an energy policy that works for this country, to make sure we're still a nation of innovators, to build an economy that lasts and that allows middle class families to get a sense of security again. That's what we were fighting for.And we've got more work to do. On that front, we've got more work to do. We are not satisfied. As proud as we are of the work that we've gotten done, we've still got miles to go on this journey.Now, what makes this year so important is because we've got a contrast this time that we may not have seen in American politics in quite some time. Even the last time we ran, we had a Republican candidate who--I had some profound disagreements with him, but he acknowledged the need for immigration reform and acknowledged the need for campaign finance reform, acknowledged the need for policies that would do something about climate change.Now what we've got is not just a nominee, but a Congress and a Republican Party, that have a fundamentally different vision about where we need to go as a country. Look, I believe they love this country. The nominee, he's achieved great personal success, seems to have a wonderful family. God bless them. But the vision that he has for this country, like the vision that Republicans in Congress have for this country, is exactly the vision that got us into this mess in the first place. Except, as Bill Clinton said a few weeks ago, it's on steroids this time. [Laughter]They don't have a new idea about how to move the country forward. They're just regurgitating all the old ideas: We want more tax cuts for some of the wealthiest individuals. We want to cut back further on things like education and transportation and the basic investments that have allowed America to succeed. They want to further roll back--to pay for the tax cuts--our core social safety net of Medicare and Medicaid. They want to strip away regulations that we fought to put in place to make sure, for example, that we don't have the same kind of financial crisis on Wall Street that we just went through. They want to strip it all away.Their basic philosophy is, if a few folks are doing really, really well, and we strip away whatever restraints on how the market operates to protect consumers and to make sure that everybody gets a chance and everybody can start a small business or everybody can be out there and compete and succeed, that if we just let everybody be on their own, that somehow we're going to be better off. And that is a fundamental misreading of American history. That is not how Chicago became a great city. That's not how Illinois became a great State. That's not how America became a great nation.We're a nation of rugged individualists with an entrepreneurial spirit. We believe in rewarding risk takers and innovators, but we also believe that we're all in this together. We also believe that when we make investments together in quality public schools, then those kids who are being educated are going to be the workers of the future and the business leaders of the future, and we will all be richer for it. We will all benefit. So it's worth us making that investment.As I was coming down the lakefront today and thinking about Daniel Burnham and ""make no little plans,"" we understand that when we build our infrastructure and great roads and railways and, in the 21st century, broadband lines and wireless and high-speed rail, that that's what helped drive us as an economic superpower.When we make investments in research and science, so that the Government gets involved and suddenly, there's an Internet, that creates a platform for all kinds of private industry, all sorts of wealth creation, all sorts of opportunity. We don't do it for one individual, for one group; we do it for everybody.The same way that together we paid for firefighting and police departments and national defense, there are some things we do better together. That's what we've always understood, and that is what has made this country great.And so the choice in this election is going to be between a vision that didn't work during 2000 to 2008, didn't work right before the Great Depression. We've gone through periodic spasms of this: the Gilded Age, Roaring Twenties. We've seen this philosophy before. But the good thing is usually we come to our senses. [Laughter] We realize, you know what, that's not the way our democracy is built. That's not how this country's built. And that's the vision that we're going to have to confront and address in this election.Now, the good news is when you cut through the noise, if you just ask people, it turns out most people agree with this, the things that we've already done. When you ask people, you know what, is it a good idea to make sure that we have more teachers in the classroom, people say, absolutely. When we tell them, you know what, taking tens of billions of dollars that were going to the banks in the student loan program, cutting out the middleman, and giving that money directly to students so that college was more affordable, is that a good idea? Absolutely.Does it make sense for us to double fuel efficiency standards on cars, so that a decade from now every car is going to be getting 55 miles per gallon, so that even though our oil production is higher than it's been in the last 8 years and imports of foreign oil have actually dropped, we've also doubled clean energy so that we are starting to control our energy future and be able to do something about climate change? Is that a good idea? People say, yes.When we tell people, you know what, manufacturing's coming back--seeing more jobs in manufacturing than at any time since the 1990s, not just in the auto industry--and companies are starting to say, you know what, it makes sense for us to reinvest in America again because America has still got the best market and the best workers, why not bring some jobs home? We're starting to see that happen. And so when you ask people, does it make sense for us to stop giving tax breaks to companies that are shipping jobs overseas, let's give those tax breaks to companies to help with their moving expenses to bring jobs back to America, they say, that's a good idea, we agree.And when we say to people, doesn't it make sense for us to make sure that young people can stay on their parent's health insurance plan until they're 26 and make our seniors' prescription drug plans more affordable and make sure that everybody is guaranteed preventive care and women are able to get preventive care and make determinations about their own health, people say, yes, that's a good idea. And we tell them, well, that's my health care bill. [Laughter]So the good news is that the majority of the American people share our vision. They believe that we have to work hard, each of us. We have to take responsibility, each of us, for our families, for ourselves, for our neighborhoods, for our communities. They understand government can't solve every problem and it shouldn't try. They understand that not everybody can be helped if they're not willing to help themselves. They understand that not every regulation is a smart one and not every dollar of government money is well spent. They want lean and smarter government, the kind of government that Rahm's providing here in Chicago. They understand that--those things.But they also say, you know what, I've got obligations to something bigger. I've got obligations to the next generation. I've got obligations to the future. That's worth fighting for. That's worth fighting for.And nowhere do we see it more than in our men and women in uniform. Now, I talked today about a--one more initiative that I'm trying to push Congress to create a veterans jobs corps, so that all these young men and women, now that we've ended the war in Iraq and are starting to wind down the war in Afghanistan, that anybody who fought for this country doesn't have to fight for a job when they come home or fight for a roof over their heads when they come home.But in our troops, we see that spirit, that sense of common purpose, and that sense of mission and that sense of sacrifice. But everybody feels that to some degree. We just have to tap into it. We know that is right, not just right for the country, but right for ourselves. Because I don't want to live in a country where all we're doing is thinking about ourselves, where we're not thinking about future generations.Now, when you make this argument, by the way, to the other side, what they'll say is, ""We're thinking about the future; that's why we have to do something about these deficits."" That's what they'll--""out-of-control Government spending."" And I smile, and I say, you are absolutely right. We've got to get Government spending and our deficits and our debt under control, which is why I signed a trillion dollars--$2 trillion worth of tax cuts in this last plan. It's the reason why Government spending has gone up at a slower rate under my administration than any administration since Dwight Eisenhower.But I say, you know what, if you're really serious about deficit reduction, then why don't we get together? We'll build on the cuts we've already made. We'll work with you to see if there are some additional waste and streamlining and Government organization we can do. We'll look at health care costs in Medicare and Medicaid, which are the main drivers of the deficit. And if--as long as we're not voucherizing that program like you guys have proposed, and as long as we're keeping that basic commitment we make to folks in their golden years, as long we're keeping that intact, I'm happy to work with you.But here's just one thing. I think somebody like myself, I should pay a little bit more in taxes, because I don't want us to be cutting student loans to young people or Medicaid for a disabled child or shortchanging our veterans for the care they need when they come home. I don't want that, because I don't need that tax cut big enough. I don't need it bad enough. And you know what, it turns out most millionaires and billionaires don't need it either. They're doing just fine. Their tax rates are lower than they've been in 50 years.And what we've proposed is simply, well, let's go back to the rates under the last Democratic administration, when we created 22 million jobs. It didn't seem to be a problem for job creators then. Why is it a problem for job creators now? What happened? What happened?So we put forward plans. Here's $4 trillion that we can reduce our deficit in a balanced way that protects the investments we need for growth and helps our middle class. I haven't gotten any takers so far on that side. [Laughter] Actually, there are a number of Republicans who think it's a good idea to have a balanced approach like this, but they're out of office now. [Laughter]So don't tell me that you're interested in the future, but you're not willing to make just an iota of sacrifice, a little bit of modification of your ideology in order to secure that future. And if you look at Mr. Romney's plan, he's got $5 trillion worth of additional tax cuts on top of the Bush tax cuts, and he hasn't identified how that they'd be paid for. He says, ""Well, we'll close some loopholes."" Well, which loopholes? ""I don't know."" [Laughter]I mean, we put forward a detailed budget. Here, here's how we can do it. Haven't gotten any takers so far. So don't buy that song and dance about, yes, we're concerned about future generations, but you don't think Warren Buffet can pay a dime more in taxes in order to support that future? So that's the debate we're going to be having over the next several months. It's a critical debate about the economy.There are a lot of other issues out there. I believe that we've got to have comprehensive immigration reform. We're a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. My opponent has a different view. I believe we did the right thing in repealing ""don't ask, don't tell"" and that we have to fight for a future of fairness and equality in this country under the law. My opponent has a different view. I think I did the right thing in ending the war in Iraq and in setting a timeline for getting out of Afghanistan. My opponent has a different view.So there are going to be a whole bunch of issues to fuss about. But the central one, about how we build an economy that works for everybody, that's the one I want everybody to pay attention to. But this is going to be a close race. And the reason it's going to be a close race is we've gone through a tough 4 years on top of a tough decade for a lot of families before that, and folks feel worn out.And if you don't have a job, you don't care that there have been 4 million jobs created. You're still waiting for yours. If your house is $100,000 underwater, the fact that the housing market's beginning to stabilize isn't satisfactory. You're still trying to figure out how you dig yourself out of a hole.And that's going to make it tough. And frankly, it makes it easier for the other guys, because the other side, all they've got to do is just say, you know what, you're frustrated, things aren't where they need to be, and it's Obama's fault. And if they can spend hundreds of millions of dollars promoting that argument, then they don't have to come up with answers. They don't have to come up with a credible plan. They figure they can surf folks' frustrations all the way to the White House.We've seen this game before. We've just never seen this much money behind the game. So the question then for us is going to end up being, well, how badly do we believe in what we say we believe in? How hard are we willing to fight for the future that we say we want for our kids and our grandkids?The one thing I learned in 2008--traveling all across the country, starting in Iowa--was for all the cynicism and negativity and phony issues and sometimes outright lies that passed for political campaigns, when a group of ordinary citizens say, we want to bring change to our country, we want to make this work for everybody, when voters start talking to each other and making commitments to each other, not just to a candidate, but to an idea, change happens. That's what you showed me last time.And so this time, we're going to have to be more determined and we're going to have to make those same commitments. I told people back in 2008, I said, I'm not a perfect man and I won't be a perfect President. But I promise you this: I will always tell you what I think, and I'll always tell you where I stand. And I'll wake up every single day just working as hard as I can to make your lives a little better. And you know what, I've kept that promise. I've kept that promise.I still believe in you. I still believe in the American people. I still believe in the American idea. And if you still believe in me and if you are willing to knock on some doors and make some phone calls and get out there and get working and fight to finish what we started in 2008, we will not just win an election, we will continue down a path of glory for this country and remind the entire world just why it is that America is the greatest nation on earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"Well, I can follow a lawyer, but following a poet--[laughter]--that's hard.I'm so grateful to Chaka and Tracey and their beautiful daughters for opening up this great home. I want to acknowledge somebody who is doing outstanding work on behalf of Illinois families every single day, your Governor, Pat Quinn, who's here today. Good job, Pat.It's nice to be back on the South Side. For some reason, they didn't--whoever organized this didn't understand the geography of Chicago, because--[laughter]--we came south, now I'm going to have to go back north. [Laughter] And then I go home back south. [Laughter] See, we could have just kept on going. [Laughter] But it's good to be home, and it's good to see so many good friends, and I appreciate all the new ones.It is true Chaka and I have know each other for a long time. The first time we met, he was still a young up-and-comer. Now he's a big ship--[laughter]--now he's a big ship in the deep ocean, so--[laughter]. But not only has he not gotten any gray hair, whereas I have--[laughter]--but he hasn't changed in terms of his graciousness and his character. And so we're just really appreciative of the friendship that we had.Usually in intimate settings like this, I don't like to give a long speech. I'd rather have a conversation with everybody, have a chance to answer questions, take comments. So let me just say a few things at the top.First of all, obviously, we've gone through an extraordinary time over the last 4 years, worst financial crisis since the Great Depression: a worldwide contraction, the locking up of the financial markets, businesses--even blue-chip companies--not being able to finance themselves, consumers getting hammered, the housing market crashing. And so we had to make a series of decisions very quickly at the beginning of my administration.And we, for the most part, made the right decisions. They weren't always popular, but because of those decisions, the auto industry came roaring back. Because of those decisions, suddenly, credit started flowing again. Because of those decisions, we were out there exporting goods once again all around the world. Because of those decisions, the ship was righted and we started growing again and started producing jobs again. And we've now seen over 4 million jobs created over the last couple of years, and we've seen, just in the last 6 months alone, over 800,000 jobs created. Strongest manufacturing job growth since the 1990s.And so there's a sense, even with a disappointing jobs report today because of what's happening in Europe--and we're now a global economy; it's integrated. So, when something happens across the Atlantic or across the Pacific, it gives us a shock. Despite all that, though, we're moving in the right direction. But we're not moving as fast as we could be. And more importantly, the reason I ran, and the reason a lot of you support me, wasn't just to get back to the status quo, it was to address the underlying challenges that had prevented us from creating an economy that, on a sustained basis, is providing security and hope and promise for people who were willing to work hard: middle class families who want to live out that dream of being able to buy a home and raise a family and send their kids to college and make sure that they're doing even better than their--than they were.And that's the reason why, even as we've done all this work to try to get the economy moving in the right direction--in fits and starts, as frustrating as it sometimes has been--what we've also tried to do is think about the future: Where are we going? And that's the reason why we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars and doubled the production of clean energy, even as we were increasing the production of oil and gas, because we want to make sure that we've got control of our energy future. That's going to be critical to our success.That's the reason we decided to double exports, because we don't want to just be a country that consumes things, we want to be a country that sells things.That's the reason why we invested so heavily in education reform. And some great work's being done in Illinois. But all across the country, over 40 States have engaged in some unprecedented reforms looking for results. And that's the reason why we made college more accessible by greatly increasing the access to student loans and Pell grants, making sure that young people have the ability to train themselves for the skills they need for the 21st century.That's the reason why we did health care reform, because not only was health care killing families, but it was also just the biggest single factor in driving our deficits and a huge strain on American businesses that were making us less competitive. And so I could not be prouder of the fact that 30 million people are going to have access to health care who didn't have it before. And young people already are able to stay on their parent's plan. And seniors are seeing discounts for their prescription drugs that are making a difference in their quality of life.And on the international scene, because, as I said, we don't live--just to continue the nautical theme--[laughter]--no country is an island. [Laughter] Well, some countries are islands, but we're not. [Laughter] The world's interconnected. And so we had a goal of righting the ship of foreign policy, regaining respect around the world, strengthening our alliances, ending the war in Iraq, phasing down the war in Afghanistan, going after Al Qaida in a way that was smart so that not only did we get bin Laden, but also we've weakened Al Qaida to the point where it's much more difficult for them to threaten our homeland or our allies.So that's a lot of work for a relatively short period of time. But we've got so much more work to do. And that's where we're going to need your help. This is going to be a close election; it's going to be a tight election. I'm absolutely confident that the agenda we have to further expand clean energy and to invest in science and technology, in balancing our deficits and reducing our debt in a balanced way, in making sure that we keep Wall Street reform that will prevent the kinds of shenanigans that got us into this mess in the first place, and making sure that we maintain health care reform that is providing, for example, preventive care for women--I want to make sure that stays in place, that we're implementing it effectively, because that's going to be part of how we create an economy that lasts for everybody, not just for a few.But in order to do it, we're going have to want it; we're going to have to fight for it. And we proved in 2008 that when people come together, they can't be stopped. That's what we're going to do in 2012 as well.So thank you very much, everybody.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody. Thank you. Well, first of all, it is just good to be home. And it is good to be back with so many close friends.Jim was in some ways being modest, because he talked about supporting me for my Presidential race, but like so many of you here--like folks like John and Neil and other folks in this room--actually, the Crown family, from the grandpas all the way to the grandkids, they supported me when I ran for State senate, supported me when I lost a congressional race, supported me when I won my Senate race, and then supported me in my run for the Presidency. These guys have been friends for a really long time. And Michelle and I love them to death, and to see how remarkable their children have turned out, watching them grow up, is a great thing to see. So please give the Crowns a big round of applause. They--[applause]--wonderful friends.So I am not going to give a long speech. This really is family. You guys know me. You don't need to hear a lot of speechmaking. What I want to do is mostly answer questions and entertain ideas and comments from you. But what I do want to just say briefly is both what this campaign's going to be about and why it's going to be so important.There are going to be a lot of issues involved because we have probably as sharp a contrast between two candidates as we've seen in a very long time, substantively. I feel very strongly we've got to have comprehensive immigration reform. We should--we're a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. Governor Romney has a different view. I care very deeply about women's health issues. Governor Romney thinks differently about those issues. I very much believe that the environment and making sure that we're protecting it for the next generation is consistent not just with Democratic traditions, but with traditions dating back to Teddy Roosevelt, a Republican. Mr. Romney disagrees with me.So there are going to be a whole set of issues to debate. But the essence of this campaign is going to be about the economy. It's going to be about how do we create an economy that works for everybody, that is dynamic, that is competitive, that meets the challenges of the 21st century and provides a platform where everybody who's willing to work hard can succeed. And I mean everybody--whatever their background, race, gender, surname, faith--that if you're willing to apply yourself and do everything it takes to follow your dream, that you can make it in this country.And not everybody is going to make it like a Lester Crown or a Neil Bluhm, but you should be able to find a job that pays a living wage and buy a home and send your kids to college and imagine that they're going to do better than you did and have some sense of security after a lifetime of labor.And the big challenge is not just since this financial crisis, but for a decade before that people felt that that basic compact was slipping away, that basic security was being lost, that rewards weren't matching up to effort and responsibility. And so that is going to be the essence of the debate: Who's got a vision for how we make sure that the next generation of Americans, as well as this generation of Americans, can succeed if they're responsible and they're working hard.Now, obviously, so much of that debate is going to be clouded by the fact that we've had an unprecedented crisis, something we haven't seen at least since the 1930s. And today's job report reminds us that for all the progress we've made, the world economy is integrated and it's still fragile: too many people still out of work, too many folks still have homes underwater, too many people are still struggling to pay the bills, too many people are still struggling with debt.But the truth is, is that the steps we took back in 2009 and 2010 have helped to stabilize this economy. It is growing. We've created more than 4 million jobs, more than 800,000 in the last few months alone. And if, as we work with other countries in Europe--but also in Asia--to try to restore a sense of stability for the world economy, then I have no doubt that we can continue on a path of growth. But that alone is not enough.And so the debate is going to have to extend beyond just how do we solve immediate crises. It's going to be how do we make sure that every child is getting the kind of education they need in the 21st century. It's going to be how we continue to make progress on energy independence and clean energy that's important for our economy, but also for our environment. How are we going to make sure that we are reducing the costs of health care while improving the quality of health care, because we are still spending 17 or 18 percent of our GDP on health care. Other countries spend 11 and 12 percent, and they're still getting better outcomes. And I believe that the health care bill that we passed is pushing us in the right direction, but we're going to have more work to do on that front.We're going to have to debate how to reduce our deficit in a way that still allows us to make the investments we need to grow and make sure that everybody is paying their fair share, doing their part. We're going to have to talk about how we rebuild our infrastructure and our broadband lines and our wireless and all the things that we need that provide a platform for success and how are we investing in basic research and development.And on each of these questions there's just a fundamentally different vision between myself and Governor Romney. I think he's a patriotic American. He's had great personal success, which we applaud, and he seems to have a wonderful family. But his recipe for how you grow an economy in a way that allows everybody to prosper, that's broad based and lasting, is basically a retread of ideas that we tried before I came into office and didn't work and in fact haven't worked for most of our history.And so that's what the debate's going to be about. And there are going to be all kinds of distractions over the next 5 months, but I cannot wait to have that debate. And I want the American people to hear it, with great clarity, because if they understand the choices involved, I'm absolutely convinced we're going to win. And as a consequence, I'm absolutely convinced that the 21st century is going to be the American Century just like the 20th.All right, thanks. Thank you, guys.",2008,obama
"Thank you. It is good to be back on Broadway! But before I get to this unbelievable opening act--[laughter]--let me thank my producer. That's usually what you do when you're on Broadway. [Laughter] Margo Lion has been such a great friend of mine for so long. Bill, during the campaign, she--Margo set up, I think, a couple of these.And for all those who performed tonight, I could not be more grateful and more appreciative. Many of you have put in a lot of time and effort, not just this time out, but last time out. And it is just a great joy to be with all of you. But Margo especially, I just want to give her a public acknowledgment because she has been a great friend.Before we get to the some of the more serious items, I do want to just share a quick story about Margo. Shortly after I had been elected--Bill can relate to this--the Secret Service bubble shrinks and it starts really clamping down. And the thing that you miss most when you're President--extraordinary privilege, and really nice plane and all kinds of stuff--[laughter]--but suddenly, not only have you lost your anonymity, but your capacity to just wander around and go into a bookstore or go to a coffee shop or walk through Central Park.So I was saying, it was a beautiful day, and I had just been driving through Manhattan, and I saw Margo. And I said, you know, I just desperately want to take a walk through Central Park again and just remember what that feels like. But the problem is, obviously, it's hard to do now. And so my idea has been to see if I was--if I got a disguise--[laughter]--could I pull this off. [Laughter]And so Margo thought about it, and about a week later I got this fake moustache--[laughter]--that I guess she got from one of the makeup artists on Broadway. And I tried it on, and I thought it looked pretty good. [Laughter] But when I tested this scheme with the Secret Service, they said it didn't look good enough. [Laughter]But I kept it. I have kept this moustache just in case in the second term I--[laughter]. So if you--so if a couple years from now you see a guy with big ears and a moustache--[laughter]--just pretend you don't know who it is. Just look away. Eating a hotdog, you know. [Laughter] Going through the--[inaudible]--you know.I want to thank Bill Clinton--not only for the extraordinary support that he's shown tonight and the support he's showing throughout this campaign, not only for the fact that he is as good at breaking down what's at stake at any given moment in our history, his inexhaustible energy and knowledge, the work that he's doing around the world on behalf of folks in need, but I also want to thank him for his legacy. Because in many ways Bill Clinton helped to guide the Democratic Party out of the wilderness and to lay the groundwork for a sensible, thoughtful, commonsense, progressive agenda that is important to remember at this moment.When many of us came together in 2008, we came together not just because of me. In fact, folks weren't sure whether I was going to win. When you support a guy named Barack Hussein Obama, the odds are always--[laughter]--a little long. But we came together because of a shared commitment we made to each other as American citizens, a basic compact that defines this country, that says if you're willing to work hard, if you're willing to take responsibility, then there's nothing you can't accomplish. It doesn't matter where you come from, what you look like, whether you're Black, White, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, able, disabled--it doesn't matter--that you've got a stake in this country. You've got a claim on this country. And if you're willing to work hard, you can make it if you try in the United States of America.And in 2008, we understood that that compact seemed like it was eroded. A few people were doing very well, but more and more people seemed to be struggling to get by. We had squandered a surplus on tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. We had paid for two wars on a credit card. Because we hadn't enforced basic rules of the marketplace, we saw more and more of our economy built on speculation and financial schemes that were inherently unstable. And it all came crashing down in the worst crisis that we've seen in our lifetimes.But part of the reason why we understood both what was possible and what had been lost was because of our memories of Bill Clinton's tenure as President, and our recognition that there's no contradiction between growing an economy and making sure that everybody is taking part. In fact, that's how you grow an economy, is because you're giving everybody a shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules.We had seen, we understood there's no contradiction between economic growth and caring for our environment; that, in fact, if we make smart investments in clean energy, that's an entire industry of the future that can put people back to work.We understood that there wasn't a contradiction between being fiscally responsible, but also making sure that kids got Head Start, kids could go to college, and we were investing in basic science and basic research. This wasn't some fantasy of ours. This wasn't some pie in the sky, wild imaginings. We'd seen it. We knew it was possible. And that's what we fought for.Of course, we didn't know at the time that we were going to see this incredible crisis: 3 million jobs lost in the 6 months before the election and 800,000 lost the month I was sworn into office.But here's one thing we understood. The campaign taught us this: the incredible resilience and the incredible strength of the American people. And so part of what allowed us to fight our way out of this hole was some tough decisions that we made: to save the auto industry even when some people said, let's let Detroit go bankrupt, and getting management and workers together to save over a million jobs. And now GM is back on top. The American auto industry is making better cars than ever.We made tough decisions to make sure that credit was flowing again to businesses large and small, and they could keep their doors open and start hiring again and make investments again in the future. And we've seen over 4 million jobs created. We've seen more manufacturing jobs created at any time since the 1990s.And so in part, the reason that we have been weathering this storm was because of some tough policies, but the right policies. But a lot of it just had to do with the resilience of the American people. They don't give up. They don't quit. So some 55-year-old gets laid off and they decide, you know what, I'm going to back to school. I'm going to get myself retrained to find the job of the future. I'm not giving up. A small-business owner, they patch together whatever money they can to keep their doors open and to make sure that they can keep their employees on, even if it means maybe they don't get paid for a while, even if it means that the owner of that business is having to scrimp. That's how much they care about their employees.Folks decided, you know what, we were going to retire at 65, but maybe we're going to have to work an extra 5 years because I'm going to make sure my child or my grandchild gets to go to college. All kinds of decisions like that made all across America.And so after this incredible crisis, America is moving in the right direction. We're not there yet; we're not where we need to be. There are still too many people out there who are looking for work, too many homes that are still underwater, too many kids in poverty who still don't see prospects for the future. But we started to right the ship, and we've moving in the direction that we imagined in 2008.And that is why this election in a lot of ways is even more important than the last one. Because as hard as we've worked over the last 4 years, as much as we've done to start rebuilding a country that's not built on how much we consume or some sort of Ponzi schemes, but built on what we're producing and what we're making, and the skills of our people, and the ingenuity of our scientists, and the risk-taking of our entrepreneurs--after all that work that we've done, the last thing we're going to do is to go back to the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. We're not going backwards. We're not going backwards, New York. We intend to go forwards. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America. We're not going back.We're not going back to a set of policies that say you're on your own. And that's essentially the theory of the other side. George Romney--wrong guy. [Laughter] Governor Romney--he was a good Governor. [Laughter] Governor Romney is a--he's a patriotic American. He's had great success in his life, and he's raised a beautiful family. But he has a theory of the economy that basically says, if I'm maximizing returns for my investors, for wealthy individuals like myself, then everybody is going to be better off.He was in Iowa talking to a woman, and she was describing her financial struggles, and his response was out of an economic textbook. He said, ""Productivity equals income."" [Laughter]Now, I guess in the aggregate, technically--right--this is a coherent argument. But the implication was somehow that this woman, or others who are struggling out there, they're not productive enough.Well, let me tell you, actually, America has become incredibly productive. People are working harder than ever. We've got some of the most productive workers in the world. The problem is not that we aren't productive enough; the problem is that productivity has not translated for far too many people into higher incomes. The problem is that profits haven't translated into jobs and investment in this country.We believe in the marketplace. We believe in entrepreneurship and rewarding risk-taking. But what we also understand is that our economy works best--America became an economic superpower--because we created a platform where everybody could succeed. And we set up rules of the road that made the market work for everybody and gave consumers confidence that they weren't going to be bilked and gave investors confidence that if you're a small investor, you're not some insider, you still have a chance buying a stock.And we understood that if we're investing in things like a Hoover Dam or DARPA--the research and development arm of our military that ended up producing things like the Internet or GPS--that that, in fact, would be good for everybody.We understand that when my grandfather's generation came back from fighting in World War II and they had a chance to go to college on the GI bill, that wasn't just good for one individual, it wasn't just good for one group. That was good for everybody. We all became richer together.And that's the lesson that Mr. Romney and the Republicans in Congress don't seem to understand, they don't seem to get. But look at our history. Ironically, the first Republican President understood it. Abraham Lincoln understood it. That's why in the middle of a Civil War he was still building a transcontinental railroad and starting land-grant colleges and starting the National Academy of Sciences, because he understood that ultimately there are some things we do better on our own. Not every Government program works, not everybody can [be]* helped who doesn't want to be helping themselves. All of us have responsibilities.And I learned early on that no matter how much money you pour into the schools, nothing replaces the love and attention and occasional scoldings from a parent. I learned as a community organizer that no government program can substitute for the caring and passion of neighbors and communities. But I also understood, and you understand and Americans understand, that when we've done great things in this country, we've done them together. We've done them together. And that's what's at stake in this election. And we're not going back to this other theory. I'm not going to go back to a time when if you got sick, you had no recourse and you potentially could go bankrupt. I'm not going to go back to a time when 2.5 million young people can't get health insurance or can't stay on their parent's plan or 30 million people who are working maybe two jobs can't afford to buy health insurance and end up in an emergency room just because they can't get sick and aren't getting preventive care. We're not going to go back to that.We're not going to go back to a time when--we're not going to refight the battles about whether or not we need to make some basic reforms on Wall Street so that taxpayers don't have to bail out folks after they've made irresponsible or reckless bets. That's not good for our financial markets. We're not going to refight that battle.We're not going to go back to a time when manufacturing is all moving offshore. We want to bring companies onshore. I want to give tax breaks to companies that are investing in jobs investment here in the United States, not shipping jobs overseas. We don't need to go back to policies like that.We're not going to go back to a time when our military could expel somebody because of who they loved. We believe in everybody being treated fairly and equally and respecting everybody's rights. We're not going to go backwards. We're going forwards.We don't need to go back to a foreign policy that thinks the measure of our security is everything we do, we do on our own. We've been able to restore respect and collaboration and our alliances have never been stronger, partly because I've got a pretty good Secretary of State.But--[applause]--and that's how we ended the war in Iraq. And that's how we're starting to transition out of Afghanistan. And that's how we brought Usama bin Laden to justice. And we're not going to go backwards on policies that make America stronger.We're not going to go back to the days when somehow women couldn't get the preventive care that they need. We don't need a situation where women aren't controlling their own health care choices. We don't need to eliminate Planned Parenthood. I want my daughters to have the same opportunities as my sons. That's part of what America is about. We're not turning back the clock. We're not going backwards.And we can afford the investments we need to grow. We can afford to make sure that every kid has a chance to go to college and they're going to a decent school and they're graduating.We can afford to rebuild our roads and our bridges and our airports and our broadband lines and high-speed rail and putting people back to work. We can afford--in fact, we can't afford not to invest in the science and research that's going to keep us at the cutting edge.We're not going to throw millions of people off the Medicaid rolls, folks who are disabled or poor, seniors who are relying on it. We're not going to voucherize Medicare. We're going to responsibly reduce this deficit. You know, two Presidents over the last 30 years that have actually reduced the pace of the growth in Government spending happen to be on this stage right here. They happen to be the two Democrats.So we have to get our deficit and debt under control. We've got to do it in a responsible way, cut out programs we don't need. I've already signed a trillion dollars in cuts that have already been made, another trillion that are slated to be made. But we're also going to ask folks who can afford it like the two of us to pay a little bit more--and some of you too, so don't chuckle--[laughter]--to pay a little bit more so that we can afford the things that will help us grow. That's the right recipe. That's what made us an economic superpower. And that's the policy that we're going to pursue.Now, here's the good news. The American people, on the issues, when presented with the facts, they actually agree with us. Now, it's hard sometimes getting the facts out. There's a lot of bugs on the windshield. [Laughter] Sometimes you've got to--[laughter]--so you got to get those wipers going pretty hard sometimes. It's not always clear. [Laughter]But when folks know the facts, when they're given a choice--and that's what this election is about, every election is about a choice--when given a choice between a vision that says we're going to have a balanced approach to deficit reduction, and we're going to continue to make investments in things like clean energy and fuel efficiency and science and innovation and education and rebuilding our infrastructure, versus another $5 trillion worth of tax cuts that would give the average millionaire and billionaire an additional $250,000 a year in tax breaks, people agree with us.On issue after issue, if you give them a fair presentation, no spin on the ball, the majority of the country--not just Manhattan--[laughter]--the majority of the country agrees with us. Which is why the other side isn't--they're not presenting anything new. As Bill said the other day, this is the same old stuff, just on steroids. [Laughter] Just more of. More tax cuts for the wealthy. We're not just going to reduce regulation, we're going to cripple EPA. And people aren't buying that. They don't really think that that's going to work.The only reason that this is going to be a close election is because people are still hurting. The situation in Europe is slowing things down. We've been prevented from, for example, the plans that I've put forward repeatedly to Congress to say, let's give States more help so they don't have to lay off more teachers. Let's--now interest rates have never been lower. Literally, the Government can--basically people will pay us to lend us money--[laughter]--and there would never be a better time for us to start making investments that could put construction workers back to work all across the country.But that's not something Congress, so far, has been willing to do. Though we're going to keep on putting pressure on them over these next few months because we don't have time just to wait for an election to do something.But folks are still hurting. And this has been a long slog for people. And sometimes when things are tough you just say, well, you know what, I'll just keep on trying something until something works. And that's compounded by $500 million in super PAC negative ads that are going to be run over the course of the next 5 months that will try to feed on those fears and those anxieties and that frustration.That's basically the argument the other side is making. They're not offering anything new, they're just saying, things are tough right now and it's Obama's fault. You can pretty much sum up their argument. There's no vision for the future there. There's no imagination. I mean, somebody is going to have to explain to me how repealing Obamacare and throwing 30 million people back to a situation where they don't have health care, somehow that's an economic development agenda. [Laughter] Nobody has really explained that to me.So it's going to be a tough election. But 2008 was tough too. And what you all taught me was that when Americans are willing to come together and make a commitment to each other, when they have a vision about what's possible and they commit to it, and they join together and they work for it, when they decide--when you decide--that change is going to happen, guess what, change happens. Change happens.And so I may be a little grayer than I was the last time I was on Broadway. Going to need to get Margo to send me something to do something--do something about that. As President Clinton will tell you, you go through some dings and dents in this job. But I tell you what. I'm more determined than I've ever been. I'm more determined than I've ever been to finish what we started.I used to say back in 2008, I'm not a perfect man, and haven't been and won't be a perfect President. Nobody is. But what I told you was I'd always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you where I stood, and I'd wake up every single morning fighting as hard as I knew how to make life better for the American people. And I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise, Broadway. I have kept that promise.I still believe in you. I hope you still believe in me. I hope you still believe. If people ask you what this campaign is about, you tell them it's still about hope and it's still about change. And if you're willing to knock on some doors and make some phone calls and talk to your friends and neighbors and work just as hard as you did in 2008, we will finish what we started and remind the world why it is America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, New York! Thank you! Well, thank you, everybody. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you. Everybody, have a seat.Audience members. Four more years!The President. Thank you. I plan on getting 4 more years, because of you.Let me just say some thank-yous at the front here. First of all, you've got an outstanding attorney general. Please give Eric Schneiderman a big round of applause. He is doing the right thing on behalf of consumers and working people all across this great State and having an influence all across the country.I want to thank my dear friend Jon Bon Jovi, who has been a great supporter for a long, long time. I have to say that the only thing worse than following Jon is following Jon and Bill Clinton. [Laughter]I want to acknowledge--Congresswoman Carolyn Maloney is here. Where is Carolyn? Thank you, Carolyn. Party Chair Jacobs, thanks for the great work you've done. I want to thank all of you who helped to make this event possible tonight.And most of all, I want to thank the guy behind me here.President Clinton and I had a chance to talk over dinner before we came out, and we talk about a lot of things. We talk about basketball. [Laughter] We talk about our daughters, and agree that you can't beat daughters. Sons who are out there, we love you too--[laughter]--but I'm just saying, we bond on that front. We both agree that we have improved our gene pool because we married outstanding women.But whatever the topic, whatever the subject, what I was reminded of as I was talking to President Clinton is just how incredibly passionate he is about this country and the people in it. You don't talk to Bill without hearing at least 30 stories about extraordinary Americans who are involved in clean energy or starting a whole new project to teach kids math or figuring out how to build some new energy-efficient building or you name it. And it's that passion and connection that he has to the American people that is infectious. And it's a curiosity and a love for people that is now transforming the world.So I could not be prouder to have called him President. I could not be prouder to know him as a friend. And I could not be more grateful for him taking the time to be here tonight. And I thank him for putting up with a very busy Secretary of State. [Laughter]Now, the reason I'm here tonight is not just because I need your help. It's because the country needs your help. If you think about why we came together back in 2008, it wasn't about me. It wasn't even necessarily just about the Democratic Party. It was about a common set of values that we held dear, a set of beliefs that we had about America, a belief that if you're willing to work hard, in this country you should be able to make it. You should be able to find a job that pays a living wage. You should be able to own a home, send your kids to college, retire with dignity and respect, not go bankrupt when you get sick; that everybody in this country--regardless of what you look like, where you come from, whether you're Black, White, gay, straight, Hispanic, disabled, not--doesn't matter, if you're willing to put in the effort this is a place where you make dreams happen. And by you putting in that effort, not only do you do well for yourself but you build the country in the process.And we had seen that those values were eroding, a sense that that bedrock compact that we make with each other was starting to diminish. We had seen a surplus--a historic surplus--wasted away on tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. Suddenly surpluses turned to deficits. We had seen two wars fought on a credit card. We had seen a recklessness of a few almost bring the entire system to collapse.And there was a sense that, although a few of us were doing really, really well, that you had a growing number of folks who were struggling just to get by no matter how hard they worked.So what we set out to do in 2008 was reclaim that basic American promise. And it wasn't easy, and many of you who supported me, certainly you guys didn't do it because it was easy. When you support a guy named Barack Hussein Obama for the Presidency you know that's not a sure thing. [Laughter] But you did it because you sensed that the country was ready for change.Now, we didn't know at the time--we knew that there had been a decade of problems, that since this man had left office we had been going in the wrong direction. We didn't realize how this would culminate in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. As Bill said, the month I was sworn in, 800,000 jobs lost. We had lost 3 million before the election had even taken place.But we didn't give up. We didn't quit, because that's not what the American people do. And so all across this country, you had folks who just dug in. They focused on what was necessary. And I do believe we implemented the right policies. When folks said that we should let Detroit go bankrupt, we said, no, we're not going to let over a million jobs go. We're not going to let an iconic industry waste away.And so we brought workers together and management, and now GM is back on top, and we've seen more growth in the U.S. auto industry and more market share than we've seen in a very, very long time. And manufacturing is coming back. Even though that decision wasn't popular, we made the right decision.We made the right decision in starting to free up credit again so that companies could borrow and small businesses could keep their doors open. We made the right decision when it came to ensuring that all across this country, States got help to keep teachers and firefighters and police officers on the job. We made the right decision in making sure that we used this opportunity to rebuild big chunks of America: our roads and our bridges and our rail lines.So we made a lot of good policy decisions. But the reason we came back is ultimately because of the American people, because of their resilience and their strength. They made it happen. They decided, you know what, maybe I'll retrain for school. A small business decided, I'm going to keep my doors open even though it's very hard to make payroll right now.One of the great privileges of being President is you go to every corner of the country and you see people from every walk of life, and it makes you optimistic about the American people. Even over these last 3 1/2 years, as tough as things have been, it made me more optimistic about the American people, that we have all the ingredients for success.It's because of them that we've seen more than 4 million jobs created, more than 800,000 jobs just this year alone. It's because of them that we're seeing more manufacturing jobs coming back than any time since the 1990s.But--and this is where you come in--all that work that we've done, all that effort, that stands to be reversed because we've had an opposition that has had a fundamentally different vision of where we should take America. They had it from the day I was sworn in. They made a determination that politics would trump what was needed to move this country forward. And they have tried to put sand in the gears in Congress ever since.And now they've got a nominee who is expressing support for an agenda that would reverse the progress we've made and take us back to the exact same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. And the reason we're here today is because we're not going back. We're going forward. We have worked too hard and too long to right the ship and move us in the right direction. We're not going backwards, we're going forwards. That's what we're doing, New York. And we're going to do it with your help.Now, the reason that they think they may be able to pull this off is because things are still tough. There are a lot of folks still hurting out there; too may folks still looking for work, too many people whose homes are still underwater. So we know we've got more to do. That's why I'm running again, because our job isn't finished yet. And this election in some ways is going to be even more consequential than 2008, because the choices are going to be starker this time.Keep in mind, when I ran in 2008, I was running against a Republican who believed in climate change, believed in immigration reform, believed in campaign finance reform, had some history of working across the aisle. We had profound disagreements, but even during the midst of the financial crisis there was an agreement of the need for action to create jobs and create growth early.We don't have that this time. My opponent, Governor Romney, is a patriotic American. He has seen enormous financial success, and God bless him for that. He has got a beautiful family. But his vision of how you move this country forward is what Bill Clinton said, the same agenda as the previous administration, except on steroids. So it's not enough just to maintain tax cuts for the wealthy, we're going to double tax cuts. We're going to do even more of the same. It's not enough just to roll back the regulations that we put in place to make sure that, for example, the financial system is transparent and working effectively so we don't have taxpayer bailouts anymore, we're going to do even more to eliminate regulations that have kept our air clean and our water clean and protected our kids for 20, 30 years.When you look at the budget that they've put forward, they're not just talking about rolling back Obamacare; they're talking about rolling back the New Deal. [Laughter] And that's not an exaggeration.And so there's an enormous amount at stake. And we're going to have to make sure that in this election, we are describing clearly what's at stake. And we shouldn't be afraid of this debate, because we've got the better argument. We have got the better argument.It's not just a matter of being able to say the change that we brought about in lifting the auto industry back, that's something we're proud of. It's not just the 4.3 million jobs. It's not just the fact that 2.5 million young people have health insurance that didn't have it before. It's not just the fact that, as a consequence of our policies, millions of young people are getting Pell grants and have the capacity to go to college who didn't have it before. It's not just the track record I've amassed over the last 3 1/2 years that I am proud of. But it's also the fact that when you look at our history, America has not grown, it has not prospered, it has not succeeded with a philosophy that says you're all on your own.That's not how we built this country. The reason we became an economic superpower is because for all our individual initiative, all our entrepreneurship, all our belief in personal responsibility, despite all those things, what we've also understood is there's certain things we do better together. Creating a public school system that works so that everybody gets educated, we understand that.The first Republican President understanding we built a transcontinental railroad to stitch this country together--he understood that there's certain things we do better together. Investments in the National Academy of Sciences, investment in land-grant colleges, Eisenhower building the Interstate Highway System, my grandfather and his generation going to college on the GI bill, building the Hoover Dam, building the Golden Gate Bridge, these things we did together. And it created a platform where everybody had a chance, everybody got a fair shot, everybody did their fair share, everybody played by the same rules.If you look at our history, the reason why we have the best capital markets in the world, the reason why Wall Street is the center of finance--because we had rules in place that made us the most transparent, where investors could trust if they put their money there, they weren't going to be cheated. You had a strong SEC. You had FDIC. You had an entire infrastructure that allowed our capital markets to thrive. That's been a strength, not a weakness.Throughout our history, there have been certain things that we have to do together. And what was true in the past is true now as well. So that's what's at stake in this election. I'm not going to go back to the days when suddenly our young people can't afford to go to college just to pay for tax cuts for me and Bill Clinton.We're not going to go back to the day where 30 million people can't get health insurance despite working two jobs, where young people can't stay on their parent's policies or seniors suddenly find prescription drugs more expensive again. We're not going to go back to the days when suddenly women don't have preventive care or we eliminate funding for Planned Parenthood. We're not going back to those days. I want my daughters to have the same opportunities as our sons. And I want our women to have the same ability to control their health care decisions as anybody else. We're not going backwards.We're not going to go back to the days when you couldn't serve in our military and at the same time admit who it is that you loved. We're moving forward with an agenda of dignity and respect for everybody.We're not going to go back to the days when folks thought somehow there was a conflict between economic growth and looking after our environment and good stewardship for the next generation. We're not going back to those days.But we're going to have to fight for it. This is not going to be an easy race. Because of the Citizens United decision, we're seeing hundreds of millions of dollars spent all across this country--unprecedented numbers. We haven't seen this kind of spending. There's never been this amount of negative spending before. There was a brief--a newspaper just printed, somebody had evaluated negative ads--70 percent of our ads have been positive; 70 percent of their ads have been negative. And I suspect that ratio could become even more pronounced as the weeks go by.And as I said, folks out there are still anxious and they're still scared about the future. And so what the other side is counting on is fear and frustration; that that in and of itself is going to be good enough, because they're sure not offering any new ideas. All they're offering is the same old ideas that didn't work then and won't work now.Even when it comes to their big issue of deficits and debt, as President Clinton just mentioned, the truth is, is that the two Presidents over the last 30 years, 40 years, who've had the lowest increases in Government spending, you're looking at them right here. They're on this stage. They are on this stage.And the agenda that we've put forward--which says, let's put people to work right now rebuilding our roads and our bridges and putting teachers back in the classroom to accelerate growth now, at the same time as we couple it with long-term spending restraint--that's a recipe that works. We've seen it work before. We saw it work in the nineties. There's no reason why it wouldn't work now. And that will allow us to make sure that we can still invest in our future.As I travel around the world--and I know President Clinton does, as well--you talk to people; nothing gets me more frustrated when I hear, sometimes, reports in the press about America's decline, because around the world there's nobody who wouldn't trade places with us. We've got the best universities, the most productive workers, the best entrepreneurs, the best scientists. We've got all the ingredients we need to make it work. Now we just need the best politics. Now we just need the best politics. And that's what this election is going to be all about.So the bottom line is this: All of you, you're going to have to work not just as hard as we did in 2008, we're going to need you to work harder. One of the things we learned in 2008 is for all the negative ads, for all the rough-and-tumble of politics, for all the distortions and just plain nonsense that you sometimes hear, when folks come together, when citizens come together and insist that it's time for a change, guess what, change happens.And what was true then is just as true now. And I want you guys to know that it is true that my hair is grayer. I haven't quite caught up to Bill yet--[laughter]--but I'm getting there. Those of us who have this awesome privilege of holding this office, we end up showing a few dings and dents along the way. That's inevitable. But I am more determined now than I was in 2008. I am more inspired by America now than I even was then, because I've seen more of this country, and I've seen its strength and I've seen its passion. I've seen what's possible.I've seen the changes we've already brought. And it shouldn't make us complacent, but it should make us confident about the changes that we can bring about in the future. It means that we're going to be able to do even more to double clean energy. It means we're going to be able to do even more to bring back manufacturing. We're going to be able to do more to put people back to work. We're going to be able to make sure that we're a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.All those things on our checklist that we haven't yet gotten done, we will get done. But we're only going to get it done because of you. I'm only going to get it done because of you.You know, I used to say that I'm not a perfect man--Michelle will tell you--and I'll never be a perfect President. No President is. But I promised you I would always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you where I stood, and I'd wake up every single day just thinking about how I can make the lives of the American people a little bit better, and I'd work as hard as I knew how to make that happen. And I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise because I still believe in you. And I hope you still believe in me.Because if you're willing to join me this time out, and knock on doors, and make phone calls, and get out there and talk to your friends and talk to your neighbors, I promise you we will finish what we started in 2008. We will not go backward. We will go forward. And we will remind the entire world just why it is the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, New York. I love you. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody. No need to--thank you so much. Thank you. Please, please.Well, first of all, to the Lasry family, to Marc and Cathy, all the kids--particularly Alex, who had been working with Valerie Jarrett for a while and now is off to business school--I just want to thank them for their extraordinary friendship. They have been great supporters and great friends for a really, really long time. And so to open up their beautiful home to us and offer such great hospitality, I can't be more grateful.To President Bill Clinton--as usual, he pretty much summed it up. [Laughter] So I don't have to add too much--don't want to guild the lily here.Nobody has a better grasp and understanding of the issues than this man. He spent 8 years guiding this country through, initially, some difficult times and then ushered in one of the greatest booms that we've seen, a recipe of stable, steady growth in which everybody participated, growth that started from the bottom up and from the middle class out.And everybody did well, including those at the top, because--in part, because of President Clinton's background. He understood what it takes to grow this economy, that there's just extraordinary talent all across the country. In little places in Arkansas and little apartment buildings in Hawaii and--[laughter]--there are folks out there who are eager to live out that American Dream and create new businesses and new opportunities. And just about everybody here, somewhere in their lives they've known that when we work together we can't be stopped. And that's what's at stake in this election, as Bill said.I want to spend most of my time answering questions, but part of what I'm going to be doing over the next several weeks is just clarifying for people the choice involved, because we have a fundamental choice. And the truth is it's an argument that dates back to Bill Clinton's Presidency. As you will recall, you didn't get a lot of cooperation out of those Republicans in Congress either. [Laughter]And the basic issue is: After World War II, we arrived at a basic consensus in this country; it was a rough consensus between Republicans and Democrats, and there was a spectrum there, but everybody understood that the market was the best generator of wealth and opportunity that we had ever seen. It was understood that America's business was business, that Government is not the ultimate source of our wealth and our freedom. But what we also understood was that there were certain investments we had to make to create a platform for opportunity for everybody.And so among Democrats and Republicans there was a belief in a basic social safety net. And there was a belief that regulations wouldn't inhibit, necessarily, economic growth, they could actually advance them. Because the reason we had the best capital markets in the world was people trusted our capital markets, and they believed in disclosure, and they believed in transparency and openness and accountability. And so small investors and large investors said, you know what, let's put our money in America.And people from Richard Nixon to George H.W. Bush understood that if we have smart environmental regulations, that can actually create opportunity. And if we have good consumer regulations, that actually helps America's brand because people can trust our products and trust our services.And there was an understanding we're going to make an investment in education, whether the GI bill or opening up more and more opportunity for a college education and making sure that we're investing in our--the crown jewel of America's economy, our colleges and our universities, because we understood that that's where innovation comes from and ultimately that's going to create opportunity.And we understood whether we were going to make investments in the Interstate Highway System or in DARPA that ultimately that would inure to the benefit of the marketplace.And we understood that we had to pay for it. The notion was this stuff wasn't going to be free. It used to be the argument between Democrats and Republicans was, what's the best way to pay for it? But we understood that ultimately these were investments worth making. And there were times where Democrats got a little excessive. We had a little too much faith in Government, a little too much faith in regulation, and there was a corrective mechanism. And Bill Clinton helped to correct some of our excesses.And we understood not every Government program is going to work, and we understood that not every regulation should be command-and-control, top down; that a lot of times the market might provide--if we provide the proper incentives, the market might come up with better solutions for how we were going to solve some of these vexing problems.But over the last 15 years, the last 20 years, that consensus has broken down. If you look at what the Republican Party today represents--we haven't moved that much. If you've compared--there's a reason why Jack Lew was the OMB Director under Bill Clinton and he was my OMB Director and now my Chief of Staff. Jack hasn't changed that much. [Laughter] He's gotten a little grayer. [Laughter] Our basic policies haven't shifted. We've responded to new information and new circumstances.What's changed is the Republican Party. They have gone from a preference for market-based solutions to an absolutism when it comes to the marketplace, a belief that all regulations are bad; that Government has no role to play; that we shouldn't simply be making sure that we balance the budget, we have to drastically shrink Government and eliminate those commitments that have ensured a middle class had a chance to succeed and to thrive for several generation.And so if you look at Paul Ryan's budget or you look at Governor Romney's proposals, what they're talking about is something that is fundamentally different from our experience in growing this economy and creating jobs. And so that's going to be the central issue in this campaign. And we're going to do everything we can to clarify that choice.The good news is, the American people, I think, agree with us. The challenge is that things have been very tough for people for the last 3, 4, 5, 10 years. And when things are tough, you're willing to try just about anything even if you've seen it before. And so what we have to do is to make sure that we're constantly getting a clear message out about how we intend to grow the middle class, how we're going to create jobs, and how our positions are squarely in the center of America's traditions. We're not the ones who changed. And the track record that Bill Clinton mentioned is one that I'm extraordinarily proud of. But as important as the work that we've done over the last 3 1/2 years has been, this is actually an election that's going to set the stage for what we do over the next 20 or the next 30. And I want the American people to understand that.But I think precisely because we're right on these issues, I think we're going to win this election. We're just going to make--we're going to have to just make sure that we get our message out effectively. And that means help from all of you.So I'm grateful for all of you being here, and I'm looking forward to hitting the campaign trail hard. And luckily, I'll have some pretty good companions along the way.Thank you.",2008,obama
"Willie Mays, everybody, the ""Say Hey Kid."" Thank you so much, everybody. Everybody, have a seat.First of all, it is true that they provide me with this really nice plane in this job. [Laughter] But as cool as Air Force One is, it is much, much cooler when Willie Mays is with you on the plane. [Laughter] I am so grateful to him for his support, but more importantly--he mentioned, obviously, the history that was made with my election. The fact is, is that we don't make that history unless there are people like Jackie Robinson and Willie Mays, who helped to lay the groundwork for a more inclusive America. And so we could not be prouder of him, and he could not be more gracious.A couple of other people I want to acknowledge. Your outstanding Governor of the great State of California, Jerry Brown; there he is. Your equally dynamic Lieutenant Governor, Gavin Newsom, is in the house. The wonderful mayor of San Francisco, Ed Lee, give him a big round of applause.I want to thank Clint and Janet Reilly for hosting us here today. We are in their spot, and we are very grateful. You can give them a round of applause.And we've got a guy who I guess is a little bit of a carpetbagger here today. [Laughter] He is former chairman of the DNC, former Governor of Virginia, now running for the United States Senate in Virginia, but is also one of my dearest friends. This was the first guy outside of Illinois, the first elected official outside of Illinois to endorse my candidacy for President. And we made that announcement together in Richmond, the seat of the former Confederacy. And this was at a time when Barack Hussein Obama was not favored to win. [Laughter] And so he is a man of character. And I would urge all of you to get to know his incredible track record and support his terrific efforts in Virginia. Please give Tim Kaine a big round of applause.So it is good to be back in San Francisco. I've noticed I've been getting very good weather in San Francisco. [Laughter] I don't know if Ed or Gavin or somebody is arranging this, but it's always spectacular to be here among so many friends, a lot of people who supported me in the past.I'm here not just because I need your help, but because the country needs your help. And when we came together in 2008, like Tim, you didn't do it because you thought I was necessarily the odds on favorite. But we came together, because there was a sense that those core values that we hold dear, the things that make America special--the values that helped to expand opportunity for people from every walk of life and from all over the world--that those values had eroded a little bit, that they weren't being observed in Washington the way we'd like them to be.We had seen surpluses turned into yawning deficits because of tax cuts for people who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. We had seen two wars fought on a credit card. We had seen an economy that was increasingly built on financial speculation as opposed to us making stuff, and manufacturing was consistently moving offshore. And we'd gotten a sense that for a few people things were going really well, but an expanding number of Americans were having more and more trouble getting by, with the cost of everything from health care to college education skyrocketing, even as wages and incomes were flat.And so there was the sense that the core of the American Dream, the idea that anybody can make it if they try, regardless of what they look like, where they come from, who they love--that everybody has a stake, everybody has a piece in this exceptional, extraordinary country--that that was slipping away from too many people.Now, we didn't know at the time that we were going to be facing the worst economic crisis in most of our lifetimes. We had already lost $4 million jobs before I sworn in, and we'd lose 800,000 jobs the month I was sworn in. But we understood what was at stake. And what we also understood was the incredible strength and resilience of the American people.And so, we made some tough policy decisions. We did some things that weren't always popular. There were those who said, let Detroit go bankrupt. But we made our bet on the American worker and American businesses. And now GM is back on top and the American auto industry is actually hiring again.We helped stabilize the financing system and made sure that small businesses were getting loans and teachers and firefighters, police officers could stay on the job. But part of the reason that we've been able to weather this storm is just because the American people are tough. And the tougher the times, the tougher they get.So one of the privileges of being President is you travel all around the country and you meet the small-business owner who kept their business open and their employees on their payroll, even if it meant that for a year or two they weren't making any money, they weren't taking anything home. That's how important those workers were to them.Or you'll meet the 55-year-old who got laid off of their job, had been working on an assembly line all their lives and now suddenly had to retrain, and then going back and discovering how much they enjoyed working in the health care sector, caring for people who really needed care.You saw all across the country people buckle down and make adjustments and businesses getting back to basics. And because of the extraordinary talents and gifts and resilience of the American people, we've been able to create more than 4.3 million jobs since we started growing this economy together; over 800,000 in the last few months alone. We've been able to make sure that manufacturing is growing faster than at any time since the 1990s.We've been able to stabilize the situation. But we also understand that a lot of folks are still hurting out there, that too many people's homes are still underwater, and that too many people who want to work--even if they've got a job--aren't working full time or don't have the benefits that they need to make sure that they can care for their families.And that's why, in some ways, 2012 is even more important than 2008. Because for all the extraordinary work we've been able to do over the last 3 1/2 years, we're not where we need to be yet. We've got to finish what we started. And that's why I'm running again for President of the United States of America.Now, it's also important because we probably won't see another election that presents a greater contrast between the parties and between the candidates. When I ran in 2008, I was running against a guy who I had a lot of disagreements with, but he believed in climate change, he believed in campaign finance reform, he believed in immigration reform. The character of the party and the Republicans in Congress had fundamentally shifted.What are they offering? They're offering not just the Bush tax cuts, but an additional $5 trillion in tax cuts for folks who don't need them oftentimes. And we know it will blow up the deficit, but their theory is--Governor Romney's theory, the Republican leadership in Congress's theory--is that the economy grows best when we are all on our own, when the market is king, and regulations are stripped away and people can do what they please.And we deeply believe in the free markets, and we deeply believe in risk-takers and innovators being rewarded. And there's no place that innovates like northern California. But we all recognize that the way America became great, the way it became an economic superpower, is because, for all our individual initiative, for all our rugged individualism, there were some things that we do better together.We understand that we've got to make investments in making sure that every child can learn. And that's why we created public schools and great public universities and colleges. And we understand that's not just good for those kids, it's not just good for our kids; it's good for everybody if we've got the most highly skilled, highly trained workforce in the world.It's the reason we built amazing infrastructure--the Hoover Dam or the Golden Gate Bridge--because we understood that that creates jobs not just for the folks who build it, but creates a platform for success for generations to come. It's the reason why we invest in things like DARPA that helps to create the Internet. No individual might have made that investment, but because together we made that investment, entire new industries have been formed. We understand that there are some things we do better together, and that's the reason why America became the singular economic power that it's become.So there are two fundamentally contrasting visions. And I have to tell you that there was a time when there was a consensus between Democrats and Republicans. Republicans might want slightly lower taxes and slightly less spending, Democrats might be more concerned about certain social investments, but there was a general consensus that all of us had to think not just about ourselves, but about the good of the country and the future. And that's changed on the other side.And you see it in this campaign, and you see it in the behavior of the current Congress. You see it when they, as I said before, suggest that the way to balance a budget is to cut taxes further--$5 trillion for folks who don't need it--and then, presumably, eliminate $5 trillion worth of basic medical research, $5 trillion of Head Start programs or Pell grants for young people, or the kind of infrastructure that will help us--broadband lines and high-speed rail--that will help lead us into the 21st century; that potentially makes Medicare a voucher program so that the costs of health care are shifted onto seniors as opposed to us trying to reduce the cost of health care for everybody.And so we are going to be facing a fundamental choice. And I want this to be a fulsome debate. I want the American people to hear exactly what they're getting if the other side prevails, and what they're going to be getting if I prevail. Because I've been pretty clear about what I believe, and we've implemented a whole bunch of stuff which is reflective of the values that I think have made this country great.People ask me sometimes, well, how does this campaign compare to 2008? I say, if somebody asks you, you tell them it's still about hope and change. And if you want to know what change is, change is the first bill that I signed into law that said--the Lilly Ledbetter law that says an equal day's work deserves an equal day's pay and that our daughters should be treated the same way as our sons.Change is making sure that not only are we attracting manufacturing back to our shores, but we're investing in advanced manufacturing--in areas like advanced battery technology or solar energy or wind power--that will not only usher in tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of new jobs all across America, but are also going to make sure that we are passing on to our kids and our grandkids the kind of planet that they deserve.That's why we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars, which means that in the middle of the next decade cars are going to be getting 55 miles a gallon, taking a whole bunch of carbon out of the atmosphere and saving everybody $8,000 for the life of their car. That's what change looks like.Change is us saying we're going to stop funneling tens of billions of dollars of taxpayer money to banks for running the student loan program. Let's just give that money directly to students, so that millions more young people are getting Pell grants and reducing the burden of debt that they have when they go to college, because we want to make sure that America continues to have the best educated workforce in the world. That's what change is. That's what we've done.Change is making sure that, yes, we passed a health care bill so that 30 million Americans won't be worried about going bankrupt in case they get sick. And now we've got 2.5 million young people who are on their parents' insurance because of this law and millions of seniors who are seeing lower costs for their prescription drugs because of this law. And everybody is able to get preventive care, and women are no longer being charged more than men for it. And they can't drop you from coverage just when you need it most. That's what change is.Change is ending the war in Iraq and winding down the war in Afghanistan and reestablishing respect for America around the world. That doesn't make us less tough. Because of our efforts, bin Laden is no longer a threat to America, Al Qaida is on its heels. And we've done it the right way, in a focused way that abides by rule of law.And so we have evidence of the possibility of change. We've seen it over the last 3 1/2 years. But we're not there yet. We've got more to do. We've got more to do to make sure that college is affordable. We've got more to do to continue to reform our education system, K-12, so that we're producing more scientists and engineers and mathematicians and that every young person has a chance to succeed.We've got to implement health care reform and make sure that the benefits for families all across the country aren't stripped away. We don't need to reargue that battle. By the way, the last 2 years--recent reports show the last 2 years, health care inflation has gone up at a slower rate than any time in the last 15 years, in part because we're starting to change how health care is delivered.We're going to have to make more progress on clean energy. We've doubled clean energy production over the last 3 1/2 years. We've got to do more to make sure that we are the most energy efficient country in the world. And we can do it. If we start retrofitting our buildings, if we start investing in new clean technologies, if we change the incentive structures for businesses, there's no reason why we can't not only grow our economy faster, but also reduce pollution quicker and put hundreds of thousands more people back to work.We've still got to rebuild--we've got to rebuild our infrastructure in this country. Now is the time to do it. We've got deferred maintenance on everything. And we've got a whole bunch of construction workers out of work, and essentially you can borrow zero percent. [Laughter] Why wouldn't we go ahead and get that done now? That would boost economic growth now and it would lay the groundwork for economic growth for decades to come. We still need to do that.We've still got work to do to make sure that our veterans are served as well as they have served us. I want to make sure that every single veteran who comes home from Iraq or Afghanistan, that they don't have to fight for a job or a roof over their heads here in the United States of America after they fought for us. That's work we still have to do.We've got to make sure that women still have the capacity to control their own health care decisions. We're not going backwards on that. We're not getting rid of Planned Parenthood.We're not going to let anybody roll back the decision that says our military cannot be denied the opportunity for service to your country just because of who you love. We're not refighting that battle. We are moving forward to fight a battle that says everybody deserves respect, everybody deserves dignity.We've got more work to do to make sure that in America everybody has got a fair shot, everybody does their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same rules.And that's where you come in. As much as I appreciate the extraordinary staff I have in the White House and all of the various agencies, I know that the only reason I've gotten this privilege is because of you and the work that you've done. And this is going to be a tough race, precisely because the economy is not where it needs to be yet. There are still a lot of folks out there who are struggling. There's still frustration. There's still fear and anxiety about the future. I think it's fair to say that, whether in Virginia or Iowa or North Carolina or California, all across the country there are a lot of folks who are still wondering, are we going to be able to fully deliver that promise of a country that is thriving and has an economy that's built to last, where if you work hard and you're responsible, you can make it.And the other side, they don't have any new ideas. As Bill Clinton said a couple weeks ago, they're just offering more of the same on steroids. [Laughter] And because they don't have any new ideas, what they will do is spend $500, $700, a billion dollars on negative ads, and their simple message will be: This is somebody else's fault, and that's enough reason for you to vote for us. And if we don't answer them, that can work.So we're going to have to work hard. But the good news is that what you taught me in 2008 was that when ordinary people come together, when they decide--neighbors, friends, coworkers, partners, families--when folks come together and say, you know what, we see a vision out there, we see a direction for this country, we know what's right, we know what's fair, we know what's just, and we're willing to fight for it, we're willing to make phone calls and we're willing to knock on doors and we're willing to talk to people, even if you know that they may not agree with us, we're willing to get organized and have our voices heard--when that happens, despite all the negativity and all the cynicism and all the countervailing forces, guess what, change happens. America is transformed. And what was true then is going to be true this time out.I used to tell people--some of you remember this--during the campaign in 2008, I'm not a perfect man, and I won't be a perfect President. But I can make you a promise that I'll always tell you what I think, I'll always tell you where I stand, and I'll wake up every single day fighting as hard as I know how for you. Every morning I'll wake up and every evening I'll go to bed thinking about how do I make sure that the American people, that they've got a little bit better shot to fulfill their dreams. And I've kept that promise.And what's allowed me to keep that promise is because, as I've traveled all across this country over the last 4 or 5 years, I'm never disappointed by the American people. I'm always amazed by how good and decent they are. I still believe in you. I hope you still believe in me. And if you do, and if we're willing to work for it and show the same determination we did in 2008, I guarantee you we will finish what we started. This economy will keep moving. And we'll remind the world just why it is the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth. Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. Thank you so much, everybody. Everybody, have a seat. You're going to make me blush. [Laughter]A couple people I want to acknowledge this evening. First of all, your outstanding mayor, Antonio Villaraigosa, is here. The wonderful attorney general of the great State of California, Kamala Harris, is in the house. Speaker John Perez is here.I want to thank my wonderful friend who accepts a little bit of teasing about Michelle beating her in pushups--[laughter]--but I think she claims Michelle didn't go all the way down. [Laughter] That's what I heard. I just want to set the record straight--Michelle outdoes me in pushups as well. [Laughter] So she shouldn't feel bad. She's an extraordinary talent and she's just a dear, dear friend, Ellen DeGeneres. Give Ellen a big round of applause. I want to thank, in addition, an outstanding talent, Daren Criss. Give Daren--[applause]. The event cochairs, Dana Perlman and Barry Karas. Yay!And most of all, I want to thank Vito, not simply for that introduction, but for a lifetime of service and a lifetime of sacrifice. As I think about Vito's story and his career, the lives he's saved, the limbs he may have saved, I'm reminded that day that we signed the law repealing ""don't ask, don't tell."" And what was most moving was not just those in active service who were there in that auditorium to witness that history being made. It wasn't just the extraordinary warmth that people expressed towards Admiral Mullen, who I think showed extraordinary courage in helping to guide the Pentagon to the right place on that issue. But it was also seeing all these veterans, some of them 60, 65, serving in Vietnam, some in the Korean war, who were there, and thinking about all those years in which the wholeness of their life had not been fully acknowledged, that they had to live divided from themselves. And to see the tears streaming down the faces of some of them, that's as good as it gets when you're President of the United States. It was an extraordinary privilege to be there. And what Vito's story and the stories of those who were in that auditorium remind us of is--obviously, I could not be prouder of the work that we've done on behalf of the LGBT community. From the work we did to facilitate hospital visitations to ending the HIV/AIDS ban, to the work we did to pass the Matthew Shepard law, to repealing ""don't ask, don't tell,"" to all the administrative work that's been done by agencies to make sure that folks are fully recognized is something that I'm personally very proud of.But what Vito's story also reminds us of is that the fight for equality and justice on behalf of the LGBT community is just part of a broader fight on behalf of all Americans. It's part of our history of trying to make this Union a little bit more perfect. The experiment that started well over 200 years ago, the genius of the Founders was a recognition that through this Declaration of Independence and our Constitution, that it would give the opportunity for people--even if those documents weren't perfect, even if the political structures were imperfect--it would give us as citizens the chance to fight to make it more perfect.And so in successive waves, the history, the scope of this country has always been to further broaden the meaning of citizenship to include more and more people, to give better and better expression to our highest aspirations, to make the country more fair and more just and more equal. That's what wars were fought about. That's what the civil rights movement was about. That's what the women's movement was all about. That's what the workers' movement was all about, this constant progression to include more and more people in the possibility of the American Dream. And so this is just one more step in that journey that we've taken as a nation.And it doesn't always go in a straight line; it goes in zigs and zags. And there are times where the body politic takes a wrong turn, and there are times where there are folks who are left out. But what makes America exceptional is that, eventually, we get it right. What Dr. King called the arc of the moral universe, it bends towards justice. That's what makes America different. That's what makes America special.And so when we came together back in 2008--and there are a lot of folks here who were fierce supporters even when nobody could pronounce my name--[Laughter]--you guys, you didn't get involved because you thought it was a sure thing. The reason you got involved in this movement for change was those values of fairness and inclusion and opportunity that all of us have benefited from felt like they were being betrayed, that Washington wasn't living up to those values and those ideals.And so we made a commitment to each other. That campaign wasn't just about me; it was about us. It was about the American people recognizing that we had taken a wrong turn, taking surpluses to deficits because of tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them, fighting two wars on a credit card. We had seen an economy that was very good for a few but more and more people were struggling just to get by, just to keep up. And it all came crashing down in the worst recession in our lifetimes.And so even before the election, we understood that we had a lot more work to do, that we had to recapture that sense of possibility and fairness; the notion that anybody in America can make it if they try; that if you're willing to work hard and take responsibility, that you can buy a home, start a business, raise a family, not have to worry about going bankrupt because you get sick; send your kids to college so that they can do even better than you can, and that that opportunity is available for everybody, regardless of what you look like or where you come from, what your last name is, who you love.That's what we were fighting for in 2008. And we didn't know at the time that we were going to have this extraordinary recession and that 4 million jobs would be lost before I was even sworn in and 800,000 jobs would be lost the month I took office.And so it's been a challenge and it's been a struggle for a lot of Americans all across the country. The good news is, it turns out that Americans are tougher than tough times. Americans are tougher than tough times. And so small businesses kept their doors open and kept folks on payroll, even if it meant that the owner of the small business wasn't pulling any salary in for a year or two, living off savings or credit cards. It turns out that the 55-year-old who lost their job in an assembly plant, they were willing to go get trained and find a new job in a high-tech industry or working as a nurse or some new door opened.There were those who said we should let Detroit go bankrupt, but because we made a bet on American workers and American businesses, GM is back on top and the American auto industry has recovered. Businesses got back to the basics, so that we've created more than 4 million jobs, more jobs in manufacturing than any time since the 1990s, 800,000 jobs just this year alone.And so we've made progress. And I keep a little checklist in my desk at the Oval Office. I've got a to-do list. [Laughter] And every so often, I take a look at it and I say, you know what, we're doing okay.The Lilly Ledbetter law that makes sure that we get equal pay for equal work--check. Doubling fuel economy standards on cars to make sure that not only consumers are saving money and we're reducing imports of foreign oil, but we're also helping to save the environment--check.Making sure that young people can go to college, rechanneling tens of billions of dollars that were being used--that were going to banks as middlemen for the student loan program, saying let's just pay the students directly, let's give that money directly to them, so that millions of kids out there are getting Pell grants and having lower debt totals, opening up college opportunity so that we'll once again be number one in the world in the percentage of college graduates--check.Making sure that 30 million Americans have access to affordable health care and 2.5 million young people can stay on their parent's plan and seniors get discounts on their prescription drugs and preventive care is there for everybody and women can control their own health care choices--check.Ending the war in Iraq--check. Beginning the transition in Afghanistan, going after Al Qaida, defeating Usama bin Laden--check. We've got some stuff done these last 3 1/2 years, with relatively modest cooperation from the other side. [Laughter] I think that's a fair characterization. [Laughter]But here's the thing. A lot of people are still hurting out there. Unemployment is still too high. A lot of folks still have homes underwater. People who were lucky enough to have work, a lot of them have trouble making ends meet. A lot of young people, they're still burdened by debt. Parents are still worried about how to pay for college and their own retirement. We've made enormous progress, but we didn't come together in 2008 just to get back to where we were in 2007, right? We made a commitment consistent with that commitment I talked about at the beginning of my remarks, that commitment to widen opportunity for everybody, everybody getting a fair shot, everybody doing their fair share, everybody playing by the same set of rules.And on that task we've still got a lot more work to do. We've got to make sure that America has an energy policy that works. We're producing a lot more oil and a lot more natural gas, but we've got to invest in solar and wind and biodiesel, to continue to reduce our dependence on foreign oil, to do something about climate change, while at the same time creating hundreds of thousands of jobs. That's work that remains to be done.We've still got to reform a broken immigration system, because we're a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. And it makes no sense for us to exclude extraordinary talent who could be starting businesses and contributing to the growth and competitiveness of the United States of America. We've still got to do that.We've still got a lot more work to do to attract jobs back to the United States. The good news is, is that companies are starting to recognize there are no workers that are more productive than U.S. workers. Some of them are starting to relocate. We've got to make sure we've got a Tax Code that rewards companies that are creating jobs here instead of shipping jobs overseas. That's a priority.We've got to make sure that our education system is working for every child, whether in East L.A. or South Side of Chicago or Anacostia or some rural town in Iowa. We've got to make sure that every kid is getting the education they need in math and in science and technology, that they can afford to go to college without breaking the bank.We still have more work to do internationally. We have restored our respect around the world in our alliances, but we can do more.And so, in some ways, this election is going to be more important than the last one. We've got to consolidate the great work that we've done, but we've also got to win a basic contest of ideas between us and the other side.Mr. Romney is a patriotic American who has experienced great success in his life and seems to have a beautiful family, but his idea--similar to the idea of Republicans in Congress, about how we grow the economy, how we make sure everybody gets a fair shot--is very different. His basic idea is, you know what, if those of us at the top are doing really well then everybody else presumably will benefit too. [Laughter] And so it's not enough just to continue the Bush tax cuts; we've going to tack on another $5 trillion worth of tax cuts.And we say we're concerned about the deficit, but if we're willing to blow a hole through the deficit like that, the only way to make it up is then to cut out all those things that we have done together as a nation to make us stronger: investments in research and development and science, investments in infrastructure, investments in helping kids go to college, investments in taking care of our veterans, making sure that if you're disabled or you're a poor child or you're a senior citizen that you've got a basic baseline where you can live with dignity and respect and get the help that you need.I don't think that's how you grow an economy. That's not the history of what's made us great. The history of what's made us great is us doing certain things together. We love the free market and we love risk-taking and we love folks getting rich. But we also believe in public schools, because that helps make us an economic superpower. We believe in investing in the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge, because that gave us a platform for success. We believe in investing in research that created the Internet, so that all those companies could be created. We believe in doing some things together, because it works for all of us.So there's a fundamentally different vision about what's going on. And a lot of this debate is going to be about the economy, but also obviously there's a different vision about how we create an inclusive America. I refused to let anybody reimpose a law that would force Vito back into the shadows when he is serving on our behalf and our safety and our security. That's not something I will tolerate. So we're going to have a lot of work to do.The good news is, I'm convinced that the American people share those values I talked about at the beginning of my remarks, those values that built this country. People aren't paying attention to the day-to-day stuff that goes on in Washington. It all just seems cynical and negative and dysfunctional. [Laughter] Right? They're not going--listening to the back-and-forth, the tit-for-tat. And they're anxious. They're anxious. Even if they're doing pretty well themselves, they're anxious about the future of their country. They're anxious about the prospects for their kids, whether their kids will have a better life than they did. And that anxiety can be tapped into.You're going to see hundreds of millions of dollars of negative ads because the other side is not offering anything new. The same old stuff, the same stuff--the same set of ideas that helped get us into this mess in the first place, they're just regurgitating them all over again. But what they're going to do is they're going to say, well, you know what, you're still not satisfied, and it's Obama's fault. That's the essence of their campaign. It's very easy to put on a bumper sticker. [Laughter] ""It's Obama's Fault."" [Laughter]And so we're going to have to work through that. And because there are a lot of folks who are still hurting out there this will be a very close election. Not because people buy what they're selling, but just because a lot of folks have given up feeling that anything is going to make their lives better. But the thing we discovered in 2008 is when people come together, when Americans come together--neighbors, friends, coworkers, spouses, lovers--when folks come together and say it's time for a change, change happens.I go home to Hawaii a lot, and--every Christmas--and we usually stay right near the Kaneohe Marine Base, which is a beautiful piece of real estate that the Marine Corps got somehow. [Laughter] And they let me work out at the gym there. And it's actually pretty depressing working out with marines because they're all 2-percent body fat--[laughter]--and they're benching 500 pounds and stuff. But they tolerate me because I'm their Commander in Chief, so--[laughter].So, last time we were back, I was working out, and during the course of a week, probably four marines came up and said, thank you for ending ""don't ask, don't tell."" It's meant so much to me, it's meant so much to my spouse, meant so much to my partner. The day before I was leaving, one marine came up--young man--and he says--he was very fit--[laughter]--first of all, he said to me, ""You're not doing that exercise right""--[laughter]--""sir."" He said ""sir."" [Laughter]But then he said: ""I can't tell you how much it means to me that you repealed 'don't ask, don't tell.' It really made me proud of our country."" And I said: ""I appreciate that. Was this something that you'd been wrestling with for a while?"" And I imagined him dealing with his partners, similar to the stories that Vito told. He said: ""No, sir, I'm not gay. It was important to me because I've had friends in my unit that were, and I know how much that tore them up, and I didn't think it was right. And I think we're a better Marine Corps because they can be who they are and serve our country. And these are just outstanding marines that I've been proud to call a friend.""And I tell that story so that if anybody out there asks you what this campaign is about, you tell them it's still about hope and change. You tell them I still believe in the American people, in the innate goodness of this country. I still believe in that vision where we all come together, that out of many, we are one. And there are more things we have in common than things that drive us apart.And if you remember that and you're willing to work just as hard or harder this time as you did the last time, we'll finish what we started. We will win this election. And we will remind the world just why it is that the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you so much, everybody. First of all, I just want to thank Ryan and David for opening up this incredible home and arranging perfect weather. We are grateful to you for your hospitality.I want to also acknowledge John Emerson, who is here, and has been just a great friend, and worked on my behalf for a very, very long time and helped to pull this thing together.I will not be singing tonight.Audience members. Aww. The President. I'm just saying. [Laughter] But usually in these kinds of settings where I've got a few friends, I like to spend most of my time in a conversation, as opposed to giving a long speech. So I'm just going to make a few brief remarks at the top.I just came from a wonderful event over at the Wilshire--or the Hilton--I'm not sure which. [Laughter] Here's what happens--because you go through the kitchens--[laughter]--of all these places and so you never are quite sure where you are. [Laughter] But I was telling folks, many of you got involved in the campaign back in 2008, and you did so not because you thought electing Barack Obama was a sure thing. Generally people named Barack Hussein Obama are not sure things in Presidential races. [Laughter] The reason some of you got involved is because I think you understood that there are a set of values that make this country extraordinary, that make this country exceptional.It's not just our military might or the size of our economy. It has to do with a set of ideas, a creed, that started more than 200 years ago, when a band of colonists decided that they had a different idea about self-governance and they had an idea that said everybody is created equal and everybody can participate and each of us, if we're willing to work hard and take responsibility, can take our lives as far as our dreams will take us.And those documents that they issued were not perfect, and the society in which they lived wasn't perfect. But they created this space where, through successive generations, we could continually broaden the scope of opportunity to more and more people and include more and more people as citizens and recognize each other as part of this American story.And so through civil wars and civil rights and women's rights and workers' rights, there's been this constant battle so that more and more people can take part. And that's made us all stronger. That's made us all richer. And it's made us this beacon for the rest of the world.And the sense was back in 2008 that maybe we had lost our way, because history doesn't always move in a straight line, and so there are times where we go sideways and even times where we step back. And we looked and we said we've seen a surplus squandered on tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. We've seen two wars paid on a credit card. We've seen an economy that has done very well for a few, but has made it tougher and tougher for ordinary folks to get by. This was all before the financial crisis, before we knew what was going to happen when Lehmans collapsed.And so we had a sense, we can do better than this. But the America we believe in is one where everybody has a shot--everybody has a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules, and if you're willing to put your all into it, you can find a job or start a business and buy a home and send your kids to college, and they're going to do even better than you can. And nobody is excluded from it. It doesn't matter what you look like, where you come from, what your last name is, who you love.That's what we were fighting for in 2008. And now we've gone through a very difficult period in our history, the toughest economy--I'm looking around the room--that any of us have lived through. And the good news is it turns out the American people are tougher than tough times, and so we have bounced back. And we made some very tough decisions to save the auto industry and to stabilize the financial system and keep teachers in the classroom. And America is coming back.We've seen more than 4 million jobs created--800,000 this year alone--and manufacturing stronger than it's been since the 1990s and a whole lot of progress has been made. But we've still got a lot more work to do. And that's why, hopefully, you're here tonight, because you recognize that that journey we started in 2008 is not finished.We've made sure that 30 million people can get health insurance who didn't have it before and that 2.5 million young people can stay on their parent's health insurance plans and preventive care is in place and women can control their own health care choices. We have signed the Lilly Ledbetter Act that says equal pay for equal work, because I want my daughters treated the same way your sons are.We have doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars and doubled the amount of clean energy to make sure that we're not only creating jobs and reducing dependence on foreign oil, but making sure that we're also saving the planet in the process and doing something about climate change.We've changed the education system in remarkable ways all across the country, made it easier for young people to go to college. Millions of young people are getting scholarships now or loans or grants that they weren't getting before.So we made a lot of progress, but we've still got a lot of work to do. We still have an immigration system that is broken. We still have an economy where too many people are out of work and homes are underwater. And there is a fundamental contrast between our vision of where America needs to go and where the other side needs to go--the other side wants to take this country.And this is going to be a close election, because people are still frustrated and a lot of folks are still hurting. And the other side happens to have these super PACs that spend $500 million on negative ads and feed into people's anxieties and their frustrations.But the good news is that those ideals I talked about at the beginning, that's what the American people believe in. They're not always paying attention to what's going on in Washington, and it seems so negative and dysfunctional, a lot of times folks just tune it out. But when you offer them a choice, a vision that says we're all in this together; and we're going to make investments so that every child can get an education; and we're going to rebuild America so we've got the kind of infrastructure and broadband lines and high-speed rail that will keep us an economic superpower; and we're going to invest in clean energy so that we further reduce our dependence on foreign oil; and we're going to do it in a balanced way, so we're asking those of us who have been most successful to do a little bit more so that other folks can come up behind us and succeed just like we did--when you give them that choice, they know what the right answer is.And so the key in 2012 is going to be how bad do we want it? Are we willing to fight for it, fight for that vision with even greater determination than we did in 2008?And I told a story at the last event, I go back to my birthplace--and I had a birth certificate for this--[laughter]--once a year. And we usually stay near a Marine base. And it's depressing working out at the gym at the Marine base because the marines all have 2-percent body fat and can bench 500 pounds--[laughter]--and they make you feel bad.This past winter, while I'd be working out, folks would come up to me and they would say, you know what, Mr. President, I just wanted to say how much I appreciate you repealing ""don't ask, don't tell,"" because I'd been serving as a marine for 5 years, for 10 years. There have been times where I haven't been able to have my partner see me off as I'm being deployed. And for you to acknowledge me not just as a soldier, but somebody who is a full citizen and equal participant in the life of this country, really makes a difference.And I was telling folks at the hotel that after about four of these, the last day, a young man came up--and first, he pointed out that I wasn't doing the exercise right. [Laughter] And then he said, ""I want to thank you for repealing 'don't ask, don't tell.' "" And I was anticipating a similar story. And so I asked him, ""Well, what kind of struggles have you been through being gay in uniform?"" He says: ""No, sir, I'm not gay. I want to thank you because I've had friends who were gay who were great marines. And it always embarrassed me that somehow--even though it didn't matter to any of us in the unit--they had to pretend to be something they weren't. And this will make us better marines and this will make us stronger as a country.""And that spirit is why I'm running for a second term, because I believe that's the essence of who we are as a country. That's what makes us special. That's what we're fighting for. That's why I appreciate you guys being on board, because I want to finish what we started in 2008. All right, thanks. Thank you.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody. Everybody, sit down. Make yourselves comfortable. In fact, it's warm out here. Gentlemen, feel free to take off your jackets. [Laughter] I'm going to. There you go. That's what's called an Executive order. [Laughter]I want to thank Jo Ann and Charles for hosting us in their extraordinary home. You can give them a big round of applause. I want to thank our event cochairs: Nicole and Clarence Avant, Lorna Johnson, Kerman Maddox, Candace and Steve McKeever, Cookie Parker, and Danielle Smith.I want to thank all of you for being here on this spectacular Los Angeles day. I'm glad some of you brought your children, your young people, which is great to see, although it doesn't seem like they were arguing that much about getting out of one of the last days of school. I don't know how many excuse notes I'm going to have to write. [Laughter]Michelle says hi. The girls, they're in the mindset that school is almost done. We're trying to keep them focused, telling them to run through the tape, don't start slacking off too early. And Bo says hi as well. [Laughter]Now, I'm here not just because I need your help, but I'm here because the country needs your help. When we came together--and so many of you were supporters back in 2008, and a lot of you got on this bandwagon before people could even pronounce my name properly--we came together not just to support me, not just to support an individual. The idea was that we were making a commitment to each other, that there were a set of values and ideals, there were a set of principles that we believed in as Americans that date back to the founding of this country.This did not begin as a perfect Union, but the charter of this country, our Declaration of Independence, our Constitution, spoke to the possibility of perfecting the Union. There were those who were excluded. There were those who were not considered full citizens. But there was this idea at the core of America that can be expressed very simply, which is, in this country you should be able to make it if you try, if you're willing to work hard, if you're willing to take responsibility, that everybody can make it, regardless of what they look like or where they come from, what faith they hold or who they love, that everybody should be able to make it in this country if they try.Now, there were a lot of struggles to fulfill that promise. There was a war fought and the civil rights movement and the women's rights movement and a workers' movement. But the trajectory of this country has always been, we're going to expand more and more opportunity to more and more people and promote dignity and respect and justice and equality and fairness for more and more people. That's been the trajectory of this country. That's the reason I can stand here today as President of the United States, because of the extraordinary work that was done in the past.And what we recognized in 2008 was, as much progress as had been made, it seemed like we were taking a wrong turn, that we were not being true to those ideals that everybody can make it. So we had a surplus turned into a deficit because of tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. We had two wars fought on a credit card. A few people were doing really well, but more and more folks were struggling to get by as costs of everything from health care to sending your kid to college were skyrocketing. And people's incomes and wages were flatlining, and job growth was stagnant, and manufacturing was moving offshore. And so we came together to affirm and assert that we were going to restore that basic sense that in America everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody plays by the same set of rules.Now, we didn't know at the time that I started running that we would end up experiencing the worst financial crisis in our lifetimes. We didn't know that we were losing 4 million jobs even as I was still campaigning, lose 800,000 the month that I took office. But we understood that we were going to have to try to work as hard as we could to bring about change that was desperately needed to fulfill this country's promise.And so yes, we've gone through 3 1/2 years of very difficult times. I had to make a bunch of decisions that weren't always popular. But we made the right decisions. Because it turns out that the American people are tougher than tough times. So, when some folks said we should let Detroit go bankrupt, we said, we're not going to let that happen; we're going to save more than a million jobs. And right now GM is the number-one automaker in the world once again, and Detroit is coming back better than ever.All across the country, we put people back to work rebuilding our roads and our bridges and our infrastructure and made sure that teachers and firefighters and police officers could stay on the job. We stabilized the financial system. We made sure that loans were starting to flow again to small businesses and businesses started getting back to basics. And as a consequence, we've now created over 4 million jobs over the last couple of years, more than 800,000 this year alone, more jobs in the manufacturing sector than any time since the 1990s.Because of the resilience and the grit of the American people all across this country, we're starting to see progress again. We're starting to move in the right direction again.But--and here's the reason I'm here today--we're not finished. We've got more work to do. This journey is not over. There are still too many folks out there who are hurting, who are desperate for a job, but can't find one. Folks who have seen their homes lose value, $100,000 underwater, don't know what it will mean for themselves, for their future. Too many young people who still are trying to go to college and having a tough time affording it. So, despite all the work that we've done, we've still got more work to do.And we've got an election that in some ways is going to be more critical than 2008 because the other party has gone in a direction that is contrary to those values that we fought for in 2008. You know, Governor Romney is a patriotic American, and he's got a beautiful family, and he's been very successful. But along with this Republican Congress, they've got a vision that doesn't say we work together; it says everybody is on their own. It says, if you don't have health care, tough luck, you're on your own, figure it out. It says, if you were a child born into poverty, pull yourself up by your own bootstraps, even if you don't have boots. [Laughter] You're on your own.It's a vision that basically believes that the answer to every question are more tax cuts for the wealthiest, the most powerful; the fewest regulations that protect consumers or keep our air and water clean or make sure that workers are treated fairly; and that somehow, if Government isn't doing anything, then the country is automatically going to be better.Now, it would be one thing if we hadn't tried this. [Laughter] But we tried it. Remember there was a previous administration. We tried this whole recipe, and it didn't work. And the idea that we--after all the progress we fought for, everything that we've done over the last 3 1/2 years--that we'd go back to the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place, I don't think so. We are not going to let it happen. And that's the reason why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America. We're not going backwards. We're going forwards. We are going forward. We're moving forward.And everything that we've accomplished, everything that we've accomplished with outstanding Members of Congress like Karen Bass, who's here today, by the way--give Karen a big round of applause; we love Karen--everything that we've accomplished should give us confidence not only that we can win this election, but that we can keep progress going.I keep a checklist in my desk of stuff I said I was going to do, a little to-do list. This is separate from Michelle's to-do list. [Laughter] She's got her own to-do list. I check both of them every day. Said that we would make sure that 30 million Americans get health care--check. We got that done, 2.5 million young people who are on their parents' health insurance plans right now. I had a gentleman, while we were taking photos, come up and say, boy, that's really helping me because my daughter, she needed health care. And think about if somebody who can afford to come here today got helped, imagine what that means for a whole bunch of families all across the country. Imagine what that means.Doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars so that by the next--by the middle of the next decade, you're going to see cars getting 55 miles per gallon. That's not only good for your pocketbook, it's helping reduce our dependence on foreign oil, and it's saving the environment in the process.We took tens of billions of dollars that were going to banks, subsidizing them through the student loan program, we said, let's take that money, let's give it directly to students. And as a consequence, we've gotten millions of people who are now getting opportunities for Pell grants and reducing their loan burden as a consequence of the work that we did.We said, in a country that is constantly expanding opportunity, it does not make sense for patriotic Americans doing outstanding work not to be able to serve the country they love just because of who they love. And so we ended ""don't ask, don't tell,"" an expression of our values and our ideals.War in Iraq--over. Afghanistan--in transition. Al Qaida--on the ropes. Bin Laden--gone.All that progress that we've made, it shouldn't make us complacent, but it should give us confidence that if we're willing to work hard, we can bring about more changes, more things that help ordinary families, so that if you're working hard out there, you can find a job, you can pay a mortgage, send your kids to college, retire with some dignity and some respect. That's what folks are looking for.The American people, they're not--they don't have wild expectations. They understand that government can't solve every problem, and it shouldn't try. They recognize that they've got to take responsibility for making sure their children are instilled with a love of knowledge and taking school seriously. They understand that not everybody can be helped if they don't want to be helped. They're not looking for a handout, but they are looking for a hand up. They are looking for a shot, an opportunity. And so we've got more work to do on a whole range of fronts.We've got more work to do to make sure that manufacturing and good jobs continue to come back onshore. Instead of giving tax breaks to companies that ship jobs overseas, we want to give companies tax breaks that are investing here in the United States of America and creating jobs for our folks back home.We've got more work to do. For all the work we've done improving our schools--and we have made historic transformations. Forty States have initiated, because of our Race to the Top program, major reforms that focus on learning, K through 12, improving teacher performance.We've still got more work to do. There are still schools right here in Los Angeles and all across the country where half the kids are dropping out before they graduate. One out of 10 are reading at grade level. So we've got to make investments, not just investments in money, although it does involve money, but also investments in reform, to make sure that there is not a child in America who is not equipped when they graduate to compete in this global economy.And it also means making sure that they can afford to go to college. And if they're not going to a 4-year college or university, they can go to a 2-year college or university, but get the skills that they need. And there are programs out there that work. We know they work. The question is if we can scale them up to make sure that everybody has access to them.We've got to implement health care reform. We've got to implement Wall Street reform to make sure we don't see another taxpayer-funded bailout. I don't want to have to go through that again.And we've got to balance our fiscal situation in a responsible way. And this is going to be a major debate that comes up next year. The other side, they're always talking about debt and deficits, which I find interesting since they're always the ones who run up the debt and the deficits, say we don't care about deficits, until Democrats get into office, and suddenly, they see religion. [Laughter]But now you've got a Presidential candidate on the other side and a Republican Congress that says not only do we want to renew the Bush tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans, we want to double down with $5 trillion more worth of tax cuts. And when they do try to explain how it would be paid for, when you do the math, what it comes down to is they would eliminate investments in science and technology that have made us an economic superpower, investments in our infrastructure that allow us to move goods and services and people around the world and make us competitive. They want to eliminate investments in education at the precise time when we've got to be investing in our young people's education.If you implemented their budget, you could not afford anything outside of defense, Social Security, interest on the national debt, and Medicare. Everything else would be fundamentally wiped out. Now, we think deficits and debt are important. But we think that the way to do it is, yes, eliminate programs that don't work, reform our health system not by shifting cost to seniors, but by reducing costs and improving quality of care. But also, let's ask those of us who can do a little bit more to do a little bit more.For us to go back to the tax rates under Bill Clinton for folks who are millionaires or billionaires, that's not asking too much. That's consistent with the idea that everybody does their fair share. That is something that has made this country great and is something that we still believe.So there are a lot of reasons why this election is important. There are probably going to be some additional Supreme Court appointments. We've got the other side saying that they'd defund Planned Parenthood. I believe that women's health should be in the control of women. I think a program like Medicaid, we can't just slash it in ways that make children and the disabled and our seniors more vulnerable. I'm not going to allow them to roll back progress that we've made on health care. We're going to have to make sure that we keep the gains that we've made on things like student loans.So there are all kinds of reasons why this election is important. But I want to tell you, this election is also going to be close though. And the reason it's going to be close is not because the other side has good ideas. They don't. [Laughter] It's not because they've got new ideas, because as Bill Clinton said the other day, this is the just the same old thing they've been peddling for the last 20 years, it's just on steroids."" [Laughter]The reason it's going to be close is because there are still folks out there who are hurting. There are still folks out there who are having a tough time. And that means that as frustrated as they are, if they're receiving $500 million worth of negative ads from these super PACs, then people start wondering, well, maybe nothing can work in Washington. Maybe that ""change we can believe in,"" maybe it couldn't happen.The other side is not going to provide new ideas, but they will try to tap into people's frustrations about a very difficult period in our history. And so we're going to have to work through the cynicism and the negativity and the just plain nonsense that we've become accustomed to during political campaigns. It will just be funded at a higher level than we've ever seen before.Here is the thing that makes me confident though: What you taught me in 2008 was that when folks get together, when citizens get together, when ordinary people get together and decide it's time for change to happen, you know what, change happens. Change happens when you make a commitment and you're talking to your friends and your neighbors, and suddenly, young people are getting engaged and involved again in the life of this country and people are knocking on doors and making phone calls and talking about the issues and getting informed. When that happens, it can't be stopped. It doesn't matter how much money the other side spends. It doesn't matter how much misinformation is out there: The truth shall out.And I expect that's going to happen this time. I understand some people, when they take pictures with me, they show me--pictures that we took 4 years ago together, they want me to sign them. And it's generally just a reminder of how old I'm getting. [Laughter] I'm all gray and dinged up--[laughter]--bruised and battered. But I want everybody here to know that I am more determined now than I have ever been. I have more confidence in the American people than ever before. Because when I travel around the country and I meet a single mom who has raised some wonderful child who has now gone to college, and she never got more than a high school education. And she is seeing him graduate, and she tells us, that's what all that work was for. Or I meet a small-business owner who didn't lay off his workers even during really tough times and didn't take a salary himself because he understood a lot of families were being supported at that time. When I meet our troops who just serve us with such professionalism and dignity and patriotism and never complain. All across the country you travel and you're just reminded how decent the American people are, how good they are, how right their instincts are.I still believe in the American people, and so I hope you still believe in me. I told you when I was running in 2008, I'm not a perfect man, and I am not a perfect President. But I told you, I'd always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you where I stood, and I'd always, every day, wake up working as hard as I knew how to make your lives a little bit better. And you know what, I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise.And so if you're willing to stick with me on this and knock on some more doors and make some more phone calls and work even harder this time than you did the last time, then we won't just win an election, but we will finish what we started. Everybody will have a shot in this country. And we'll remind the world just why it is that the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody. Everybody, please have a seat. Well, it is wonderful to be with all of you. Let me begin by thanking our hosts, Josh and Genine. Thank you so much for opening up this extraordinary home--and their gorgeous daughters who are doing all wonderful things. I was telling Josh, you cannot beat daughters. No offense, sons, but--[laughter]--I'm just saying, when you've got wonderful daughters, it puts a smile on your face. But thank you so much for your hospitality.You guys benefit from having one of the best Governors in the country. Please give Martin O'Malley a big round of applause. Absolutely. An outstanding Lieutenant Governor, classmate of mine at Harvard, although he was a little younger than me, Anthony Brown. Two wonderful allies, great friends, great champions on behalf of working people not just here in Maryland, but all across the country: Barbara Mikulski is here, the senior Senator, and Ben Cardin in the house. We've got the wonderful Congressman--I loved his dad; he's doing just a great job following in his footsteps--John Sarbanes is here. And the outstanding mayor of Baltimore, Stephanie Rawlings-Blake is in the house.And of course, all of you are here, and we're very pleased with that. I'm going to be very brief, because usually what I want to do in a setting like this is to take questions and provide comments or get advice.But let me just say briefly, building on what Martin said, we've gone through the toughest economy and the toughest financial crisis in our lifetimes. What we've seen not just here in the United States, but worldwide, is something that we haven't seen since the thirties. And we've still got a long way to go. There are a lot of folks out there who are hurting--a lot of folks who are looking for work or are underemployed, a lot of folks whose homes are underwater--and we've been reading over the last several days about, because of the plunge in housing prices, the loss of that wealth that a lot of families are experiencing. It's put enormous strains on people all across the country, including here in Maryland.But what we have been able to do over the last 3 1/2 years, after a decade in which we had been moving in the wrong direction, is to begin to point towards a trajectory where here in this country, everybody is getting a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, everybody is playing by the same set of rules; trying to restore those core values here in America where if you work hard, you can make it, regardless of where you come from, what you look like, you have a chance if you act responsibly and you're willing to put in some sweat equity to make it here in America.That's what the rescue of the auto industry was all about, recognizing that if you place a bet on American workers and American ingenuity, and people start cooperating, that we could once again be number one. And we're seeing GM now the number-one automaker in the work and the U.S. auto industry not only back on its feet, but producing cars that people want to buy all around the world.It's what we're seeing in clean energy, where we've now doubled clean energy production since I came into office. The progress that we've been able to make with respect to making sure that businesses have markets all around the world so that we're not just known as a country that buys things, but we're also a country that's selling stuff. And we're well on track to double our exports since I came into office, because I want once again for products made in the United States to be known around the world as the best products that are available.So we've been able to right the ship a little bit. We're moving in the right direction, but this election in many ways is going to be more consequential than 2008, because for all the changes that we've been able to achieve--equal pay for equal work legislation, reversing ""don't ask, don't tell,"" health care legislation that gives 2.5 million young people the ability to stay on their parents' health care plans and gives 30 million people the opportunity to get affordable insurance for the first time, Wall Street reforms that are able to make sure that we don't go through another taxpayer bailout of our banking system like we did that last time. Despite all that work, we're going to need another term to make sure that we consolidate these gains and we lock in the kind of progress that we need to ensure that America's middle class is growing again.And the reason this election is so important is because you'll never see a sharper contrast between the two parties in the vision that they have for where this country needs to go.You've got a party that, at this point, its only recipe for success is another $5 trillion worth of tax cuts on top of the Bush tax cuts that--by every independent analyst who's looked at it--would actually make a our debt and our deficits much worse, or alternatively, would lead to us slashing the kinds of investments that are required for us to grow over the long term: investments in basic science and research and development that have been made us an economic superpower; investments in education, because we know that in the 21st century, those countries that have the best trained workers are going to be the most successful; investments we make in our basic infrastructure--our roads, our bridges, broadband lines, wireless networks; investments we make in ensuring that people who've worked all their lives can retire with dignity and respect, things like Medicare and Social Security.And so there's going to be a very stark choice in terms of how we deal with our debt and our deficits, how we grow an economy, how we invest in our people to make sure that the next generations succeeds.And the good news is, is that the American people generally agree with our vision. I mean, if you just put in front of them issue after issue and you present the Democratic approach and the Republican approach, we win. The challenge is, because folks are still hurting right now, the other side feels that it's enough for them to just sit back and say things aren't as good as they should be, and it's Obama's fault. I mean, you can pretty much put their campaign on a tweet and have some characters to spare. [Laughter]And that's why your involvement, your contributions, your investment in this election, your willingness to talk to your friends and your neighbors and your coworkers and to help mobilize the same kind of energy on the ground that we had last time is going to be so important. And it's going to be important not just for this Presidential election, but it's going to be important to make sure that we retain control of the Senate. It's going to be important for us to be able to take the House.But the one last thought I want to leave you with is a sense of optimism about how solvable our problems are. It's become fashionable to talk about how America can't recover from these kinds of challenges. You know what, that's what they've said throughout our history. They've always underestimated the resilience and the strength of the American people. And we've been through tougher times before.And I, as you might imagine, spend a lot of time traveling all around the world. There's not a country that wouldn't trade places with us. If you look at, as tough as things have been, the pace at which we've grown, the accessibility of solutions to our fiscal problems relative to what's happening in Europe, for example, what's required is not out of reach.It will require some tough choices. Most of all, it requires those on Capitol Hill to work across party lines to achieve some basic solutions. But we are poised to make sure that the 21st century is the American century, just like the 20th century was. It's going to require some work though, and this election is going to help determine it.So I hope you guys are ready to go. I hope you are still fired up. I am just as determined as I've ever been, and I'm looking forward to this campaign.So thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, hello, hello! How's it going, Maryland? How's it going, Baltimore? Well, it is good to be in Baltimore, home of what may end up being rivals with the White Sox: the Orioles. [Laughter] I hear you guys are--the Orioles are having a pretty good season, I got to admit. They're doing all right.It is wonderful to see all of you. A couple of people I just want to acknowledge. First of all, one of the finest Governors we have in this country, Martin O'Malley is in the house. Your Lieutenant Governor, Anthony Brown, is here. Two of the outstanding leaders of the United States Senate: the senior Senator, although young at heart, Barbara Mikulski is here. And the junior Senator, but wiser than his years--[laughter]--Ben Cardin is here.You've got an outstanding congressional delegation: Donna Edwards, John Sarbanes, Elijah Cummings. You've got Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake in the house. And I want to give a big round of applause--because it's not easy to do--I want to give Anna, who spoke before the Governor, give her a big round of applause, because she did an outstanding job.Oh, it wasn't on my card--Dutch is here. Give it up. Sorry, brother, didn't see you. He's doing a great job. This is an outstanding congressional delegation.Now, I am here today not just because I need your help, although I do. But I'm here because the country needs your help. A lot of you got involved in our campaign in 2008, and we came together not because of me; we came together because all of us shared the feeling that we needed to reclaim the basic bargain that built this country, that created the biggest middle class that the world had ever seen.We came together because of a shared belief that in America, your success should not be determined by the circumstances of your birth. If you're willing to work hard, if you're willing to take responsibility, you should be able to own a home. You should be able to send your kids to college. You shouldn't be bankrupt when you get sick. You should be able to retire with dignity and respect. No matter who you are, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter who you love, no matter what your faith, here in America you should be able to make it if you try. That's why we came together.And back in 2008, we had a sense that Washington had strayed away from these basic values. Think about it. We had a record surplus that was squandered on tax cuts for people who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them; two wars fought on a credit card; Wall Street speculation reaping huge profits for a few while manufacturing was leaving our shores and a shrinking number of people were doing fantastically well, but more and more people had to get by with falling incomes even while the cost of everything from college to health care was skyrocketing.We saw the slowest job growth in half a century in the decade before I took office. And then it all culminated in a house of cards that collapsed in the most destructive financial crisis since the Great Depression. In the last 6 months of 2008, while we were campaigning, our friends and neighbors lost nearly 3 million jobs. Over 800,000 more were lost the month I was sworn in.So, even as we were in Grant Park that night celebrating, as much hope and possibility as we felt on that cold day in January on the National Mall, we knew we had our work cut out for us. And so we had to take action--bold, swift action, and sometimes it wasn't popular--to prevent another depression. And we understood that the road to recovery would not be easy. We knew it would take time. We knew there would be ups and downs. We knew there would be plenty of stubborn opposition along the way. But we knew--we also knew this: If we were willing to act wisely and with unity, and if we were persistent and we stayed at it, if we were willing to roll up our sleeves, if we were determined not to quit, then we could come back stronger than before. And I still believe that.Nothing has shaken my faith in that belief. In fact, the American people continually confirm it for me. Because they are strong and they are resilient, I know America will come back stronger, and I know our better days are ahead of us.And I believe that because of you. You guys give me faith. It's been tough, but the American people are tougher. And so while some people were saying, let's go ahead and let Detroit go bankrupt, we said let's make our bet on the American worker and on American businesses. And as Governor O'Malley said, GM is number one again, and we are coming back stronger than before.We had small-business owners that I had a chance to meet who would describe for me how they----Audience members. We love you, Mr. President!The President. I love you too. I love you back. [Laughter]But small-business owners who would decide, you know what, I'm not going to lay off my workers, even though it means I don't have to take a salary this year, or because I know that families are depending on me. We don't quit. We keep going. You saw people who had been laid off from their jobs, and at the age of 50 or 55, they go back and retrain for a new job at a new industry. Don't quit. With grit and resilience and innovation, we're fighting our way back.And so just like we didn't let Detroit go bankrupt--not only did we save the auto industry, but we're actually seeing better cars made, which allows our auto industry to be on top of the world once again--doubling fuel efficiency standards on cars so that you'll get 55 miles a gallon in the next decade. That will save the average family $8,000 during the life of a car. So not only did we prevent liquidation, we're actually coming back stronger than before.The same is true when it came to manufacturing. Manufacturing is now hiring at a faster pace, investing in America again, consistently adding jobs for the first time since the 1990s. Businesses starting to get back to basics, the private sector creating nearly 4.3 million new jobs in the last 27 months, over 800,000 jobs just this year alone.Now, does this make us satisfied? No. Not when we've got so many folks who are still out there looking for work. Not when so many homes are still underwater. Not when so many States are still laying off teachers and first-responders.This crisis did not happen overnight; it will not be solved overnight. The fact is, job growth in this recovery has been stronger than the one following the last recession a decade ago. We've recovered more effectively than most other advanced nations. But the hole we have to fill is deep. The global aftershocks are great. And that's why we've got to keep pressing with actions that further strengthen this recovery. We've got more work to do. We know that.Now, what we also understand is the last thing we can do is return to the very policies that got us into this mess in the first place. Not now. Not with so much at stake, Baltimore. We have come too far to abandon the change that we fought for these past 4 years. We've got to move forward to the future we imagined where everybody is getting a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same rules.And that's the choice in this election. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America. We've got more work to do.Now, my opponent in this election, Governor Romney, is a patriotic American. He's raised a wonderful family. He should be proud of the personal success he achieved as the head of a large financial firm. But I think he's--he has drawn the wrong lessons from these experiences. He seems to believe that if CEOs and wealthy investors like him are doing well, the rest of us automatically do well.Audience member. No way!The President. When a woman shared the story of her financial struggles in Iowa, he gave her an answer out of an economic textbook. He said, ""Well, our productivity equals our income."" And the implication was, is that people are having trouble paying the bills because they're not productive enough or working hard enough.Well, those of us who've spent time in the real world know that the problem is not the American people aren't productive enough. You've been working harder than ever. The challenge we're facing is that for over a decade, harder work hasn't led to higher incomes. Bigger profits at the top haven't led to better jobs across the board. You can't solve that problem if you can't even see it. [Laughter]Now, what a lot of current Republicans don't seem to get is that a healthy economy doesn't just mean you're maximizing your own profits through massive layoffs or busting unions. You don't make America stronger by shipping jobs and profits overseas. When Governor Romney or the Republicans controlling the House of Representatives propose cutting taxes for folks who don't need them while raising them on 18 million working families, that's not a recipe for economic growth.And by the way, there's nothing new about these ideas. This is the same old stuff they have been peddling for years. [Laughter] Although, as Bill Clinton pointed out the other day, this time their agenda is on steroids. [Laughter] They want even bigger tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. They want even deeper cuts to things like education and Medicare and research and technology. They want to give banks and insurance companies even more power to do as they please.Audience members. No!The President. And so when I hear Governor Romney say his 25 years in the private sector gives him a special understanding of how the economy works, my question is: Why are you running with the same bad ideas that brought our economy to the brink of disaster?I mean, either he believes that it will lead to a different result this time--although there's no evidence of that--or he's hoping you won't remember just what happened the last time we tried those bad ideas. And we're here to say we remember, and we're not going back there. We're moving this country forward.I want to be clear. We don't expect government to solve all our problems, and it shouldn't try to solve all our problems. I learned from my mother that no education policy is more important than your parents nagging you--[laughter]--and making--and giving you the love and attention and scoldings you need----Audience member. Thanks, Mom. The President. Thanks, Mom. [Laughter] Absolutely.My first job--or one of my first jobs out of college--was working with a group of Catholic churches who taught me no poverty program can make as much of a difference in people's lives as the kindness and commitment and engagement of a caring neighbors and caring friends. And not every regulation is smart. Not every tax dollar is spent wisely. And not every person can be helped who refuses to help themselves.But that's not an excuse to tell the vast majority of responsible, hard-working Americans--many of whom are struggling--you're on your own; that unless you are lucky to have parents who can afford to lend you money, you may not be able to go to college; that even if you pay your premiums every month, the insurance company may decide to drop your coverage when you need it most and you're out of luck. That's not who we are. That's not what built America.We built this country together. We built railroads and highways and the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge. We built those things together. We sent my grandfather's generation to college on the GI bill, including my grandfather. We did that together. We didn't do these things--making investments in research that ultimately led to the Internet or GPS or all these things that created platforms for private businesses to succeed--we didn't do these things for one particular individual or one particularly group. We did it because we understood this will make us all richer. If we've got great public schools and great public universities, and we're making these investments in outstanding infrastructure, that's good for everybody. Everybody can succeed. It moved us together as one Nation and as one people.And that's the lesson--the true lesson of our past. That's the right vision for our future. That's why I'm running again for President of the United States.You know, I'm running to make sure that by the end of this decade, most--more of our citizens hold college degrees than any nation on Earth. I want to help our schools hire and reward the best teachers, especially in math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses are looking for right now. In the 21st century, higher education cannot be a luxury; it is an economic imperative that every American should be able to afford. And we're going to make that happen. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President.I want to make sure the next generation of high-tech manufacturing takes root in Baltimore and Cleveland and Pittsburgh. I want to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs overseas. I want to start rewarding companies that are creating jobs and investing right here in Maryland, right here in the United States of America. That's the choice in this election.I'm running because I want us to keep moving towards a future where we control our own energy. Our dependence on foreign oil is at its lowest point in 16 years. As I said, we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars, with cooperation from workers and management, which is why our cars will average nearly 55 miles per gallon. Thousands of Americans have jobs because the production of renewable energy in this country has doubled in just 3 years.Now is not the time to cut these investments out, especially when we're giving $4 billion away to oil companies every year. Now is the time to end those subsidies to an industry that's already profitable, double down on clean energy that has never been more promising for our economy and our security and for the safety of our planet. That's why I'm running for President. That's the choice in this election.For the first time in 9 years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. Bin Laden is no longer a threat to this country. Al Qaida is on the path to defeat. By 2014, the war in Afghanistan will be over. So there is a foreign policy dimension to this election.America is safer and more respected because of the courage and the selflessness of the United States Armed Forces. And as long as I'm Commander in Chief, with the help of this outstanding congressional delegation, this country will care for our veterans and serve our veterans as well as they've served us. Nobody who fights for this country should have to fight for a job or a roof over their heads when they come home. There's just a difference between me and the other guy on this issue.My opponent says it was ""tragic"" to end the war in Iraq. He won't set a timeline to end the war in Afghanistan. I have set that timeline. I intend to keep it, because after a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives and over a trillion dollars, the nation we need to build is our own. So I want to use half of what we're no longer spending on war to pay down our deficit. I want to invest the rest in education and research. I want us to repair our bridges and our roads, our runways, our wireless networks. And that's the choice in this election.I want to pay down our debt in a way that is balanced and responsible. I love listening to these guys give us lectures about debt and deficits. [Laughter] I inherited a trillion-dollar deficit. [Laughter] We had a surplus; they turned it into a deficit, built in a structural deficit that extends for decades. And----Audience member. And then, they blamed you! [Laughter]The President. Isn't that something?So we inherited a trillion-dollar deficit. We signed $2 trillion of spending cuts into law. I laid out a detailed plan for a total of $4 trillion in deficit reduction. My opponent won't admit it, but even when you account for the steps we took to prevent a depression and jump-start the economy, all right? So you include the Recovery Act, all the stuff we did to help States like Maryland make sure that they didn't have to lay folks off, and put people back to work, even if you take that into account, spending under my administration has grown more slowly than under any President in 60 years.So this notion that somehow we caused the deficits is just wrong. [Laughter] It's just not true. And anybody who looks at the math will tell you it's not true. And if they start trying to give you a bunch of facts and figures suggesting that it's true, what they're not telling you is, is that they baked all this stuff into the cake with those tax cuts and a prescription drug plan that they didn't pay for and the war. So all this stuff is baked in, with all the interest payments for it.It's like somebody goes to a restaurant, orders a big steak dinner, martini all that stuff, and then just as you're sitting down, they leave--[laughter]--and accuse you of running up the tab. That's what they do. I am not making this up. [Laughter] I mean, press, go back, check, take a look at the numbers.So we've made tough cuts, and we've proposed additional work that we can do--streamlining Government, cutting more waste, reforming our Tax Code so it's simpler and fair, but also so that it asks the wealthiest Americans--folks like me--to pay a little bit more.Now, in contrast, my opponent, he's proposed a new $5 trillion tax cut on top of the Bush tax cuts. This includes a 25-percent tax cut for nearly every millionaire in the country. Now, he won't detail how he's going to pay for this, but the bill for this tax cut will either be passed on to our children, or it's going to be paid for by you, a whole lot of ordinary Americans. And I refuse to let that happen again.I refuse to pay for another millionaire's tax cut by eliminating medical research on projects that could help cure cancer or Alzheimer's. I refuse to pay for another tax cut by kicking kids off of Head Start programs or asking students to pay more for college or eliminating health insurance for millions of poor and elderly and disabled Americans who rely on Medicaid.I'm not going to allow Medicare to be turned into a voucher that would end the program as we know it. We're going to reform Medicare not by shifting costs to seniors, but by reducing the spending that isn't making people healthier. There are ways to do this that don't but the burden on seniors. That's what's at stake, Baltimore.And on issue after issue, we cannot afford the next 4 years going backward. We need forward, not backwards. We need better, not worse. America doesn't need to refight the battles we just had over Wall Street reform and health care reform.Let me tell you something. Allowing 2.5 million young people to stay on their parent's health insurance plan, that was the right thing to do. Cutting prescription drug costs for seniors, right thing to do. We're not going to go back to the days when insurance companies could cancel your policy or deny you coverage or charge women differently than men. We're not going back there.We don't need another political fight about ending a woman's right to choose, or getting rid of Planned Parenthood, taking away access to affordable birth control. I want women to control their own health choices, just like I want my daughters to have the same opportunities as your sons.Working with Barbara Mikulski and others, we want to--I want to sign the ""Paycheck Fairness Act"" into law so women can fight for fair pay. We're not turning back the clock. We want to go forward.We need to put an end to elections where multimillion-dollar donations speak louder than the voices of ordinary citizens.We're not going back to the days when you could be kicked out of the United States military just because of who you are and who you love. We're moving forward to a country where we treat everybody fairly and everybody equally, with dignity and respect. And here in Maryland, thanks to the leadership of committed citizens and Governor O'Malley, you have a chance to reaffirm that principle in the voting booth in November. It's the right thing to do.It's time to stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they're children of undocumented immigrants. You know, this country is at its best when we harness the God-given talents of every individual, when we hear every voice, when we come together as one American family and we're all striving for the same American Dream. That's what we're fighting for. That's why I'm running for President. And that's why I need your help.Maryland, this election is going to be even closer than the last one. We're going to have to contend with even more negative ads, more cynicism, more foolishness than we saw in the last campaign. But the outcome of this election, ultimately, it's up to you. That's one thing we learned in 2008. There's nothing more powerful than millions of voices calling for change. When you knock on enough doors, and pick up a phone and talk to enough neighbors and friends, when you decide it's time for change to happen, guess what: change happens. Change comes to America.And that's the spirit we need again. So, if people ask you, what's this campaign about, you tell them it's still about hope. You tell them it's still about change. You tell them it's still about ordinary people who believe that in the face of great odds, we can make a difference in the life of this country.I still believe that. I believe this country is not as divided as our politics suggest. We've got more in common than the pundits tell us. I believe we're not Democrats or Republicans first, we're Americans first. Most of all, I still believe in you. And I want you to keep believing in me. You know, I----Audience members. Yes, we do! Yes, we do! Yes, we do!Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. I told you in 2008 I wasn't a perfect man. Michelle told you too. [Laughter] And I told you I'd never be a perfect President. But I promised you I would always tell you what I thought and I'd always tell you where I stood. And most of all, I told you I'd wake up every single day fighting as hard as I knew how on your behalf to make your life a little bit better. And I have kept that promise. And I will keep it as long as I have the honor of serving as your President.So, if you're willing to stick with me and fight with me and press on, if you're willing to work even harder than we did in 2008, I guarantee you we will move this country forward. We will finish what we started. And we'll remind the world just why it is the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you. God bless America. Thank you.",2008,obama
"Hello! Thank you! How's it going Philadelphia? Well, it is good to be back in Philadelphia. It is good to be among so many good friends, including Benjamin Franklin, one of my favorite Founders. [Laughter] I have to admit, I had to restrain myself because this is such an amazing facility, and just wandering around, I started reading about all kinds of American history and that the Dead Sea Scrolls were here. [Laughter] Staff was saying, Mr. President, you have some other stuff that you have to do.There are a couple of acknowledgments that I want to make. First of all, you've got one of the best mayors in the country, Mayor Michael Nutter is here. You've got a couple of the finest Members of Congress in Bob Brady and Chaka Fattah. And you've got somebody here who's been one of my dearest friends and one of my favorite people who has always had my back, and he and I share a lot in common. We're both--we both pretend to play basketball, even though we're way too old. [Laughter] We both married up and we both have extraordinary daughters. He happens also to be one of the best Members of the Senate that we have. Bob Casey is in the house.So I'm here not just because I need your help, although I do. I'm here because the country needs your help. When you think back to 2008, a lot of you were involved in that campaign. You didn't get involved because you thought Barack Obama was the odds-on favorite to become President of the United States. Let's face it. That was a long shot. The reason we came together was because we shared a belief in the basic bargain that built this country: the idea that if you're willing to work hard, if you're willing to take responsibility, that in this country you can make it; that you can find a job that pays a living wage and you can save and buy a home. You can send your kids to college so they do even better than you did. You can retire with some dignity and some respect. The idea that no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter what your faith, no matter who you love, that in America you can make it if you try.It's that idea that builds the broadest middle class in the history of the world--and that was and has been the strength of America, the backbone of America--is that everybody had a shot. And we felt back in 2008 that those ideals were being lost, that we had taken a wrong turn. We had taken a surplus left behind by President Clinton and turned it into deficits as far as the eye could see, not because we invested in our economic future, but because we gave tax cuts to folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. We put two wars on a credit card. Our economy increasingly was built on financial speculation and a housing bubble. Manufacturing was leaving our shores.And although a few people were doing really, really well, that broad-based middle class that built this country, that was the essence of this country, found themselves--you found yourselves--in a situation where wages, incomes were flatlining and job growth was the most sluggish it had been in 50, 60 years and the cost of everything from health care to college education kept on going up and up and up. And it all culminated in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. Three million jobs lost in the 6 months before I took office, while we were campaigning, 800,000 jobs lost the month that I was sworn into office.And so we had to make a series of tough decisions and decisive decisions and quick decisions, and we had to do it without much help from the other side. But the thing that gave me confidence throughout was what I had learned about the American people as I traveled all across the country--and it is a great privilege just running for President and obviously a greater privilege being President because you meet Americans from every walk of life and they show you their grit and they show you their determination. And it turns out Americans are tougher than any tough times.And so when some people said we should let Detroit go bankrupt, we decided, no, we're going to make a bet on the American worker and American industry. And because of the actions that we took, GM is back on top, and we're seeing the auto industry rehiring and producing better cars than ever. We helped to stabilize the financial system so small businesses could get help again and get credit and financing flowing again. Businesses got back to basics, and we created 4.3 million jobs over the last 27 months, 800,000 this year alone.So we've made progress. And the reason we made progress was in part because of our policies, but in part because Americans everywhere figured out how they were going to respond. And so you had small-business owners who decided, I'm not going to lay off these workers because their families are counting on their jobs, that maybe I'll take out less this year, maybe I won't even pay myself a salary this year so I can keep my doors open.And you had folks who were laid off at the age of 45 or 50, and they decided, you know what, I'm not just going to give up, I'm going to retrain, and I'm going to find a job for the future, even if it means I'm sitting in a classroom with kids who are my kid's age. All across the country people made tough decisions, but they were determined to move forward because, Americans, we don't quit. We don't quit.And so we can say that we are in a stronger position, we are moving in a better direction, than when I took office. Now, does that mean that I'm satisfied? Does that mean we are satisfied? Absolutely not. Because we have too many friends and neighbors who are still out of work. We know too many people whose homes are still underwater, too many folks who still have too much trouble paying the bills at the end of the month. These problems that we've got, they weren't created overnight, and we never thought they'd be solved overnight. But we understand where we need to go. We understand we've got to keep moving forward. And we understand that the last thing we need is to go back to the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place.And let me tell you something: That is all the other side is offering. That's all they're offering. Governor Romney is a patriotic American, he's got a lovely family, and he should be proud of his personal success. But his ideas are just retreads of stuff that we have tried and that have failed. Bill Clinton described it well the other day; he said, they want to do the same thing, just on steroids. [Laughter]If you really pay attention--and one of our jobs during this election is to get folks to pay attention to what the other side is actually offering--then it boils down to deeper tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans, $5 trillion in tax cuts on top of the Bush tax cuts, an average of a 25-percent tax cut for millionaires all across the country, and the elimination of regulations that would make sure that Wall Street doesn't engage in the kind of behavior that resulted in this crisis, that would roll back the kinds of progress we've made making sure insurance companies can't drop you when you get sick, that would roll back environmental and worker protection and consumer protections that we have been working on not just during my administration, but for the last 30, 40 years. And that's it. That's the essence of what they're offering.And I guess he thinks either it would result in a different outcome than it did when we just tried this 10 years ago, or he and the Republican Congress are counting on the notion that we forgot how it turned out. [Laughter] We didn't forget. We remember. We're not going back. We're moving forward, and that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America.I'm running to make sure that we keep bringing manufacturing and industry back to Philadelphia, back to Pittsburgh, back to Pennsylvania, back to Ohio. I want to stop giving tax breaks for companies that are shipping jobs overseas. I want those tax breaks to go to companies that are investing right here in the United States of America.I'm running to make sure that we continue on a path of providing the best education possible for every single one of our children and make sure that we've got the highest rates of college graduates of any country on Earth, because that's going to be the future. We took a student loan program where tens of billions of dollars were being funneled to banks as middlemen in the student loan program, we said, why don't we just give that money directly to students. And as a consequence, we've got millions of students who are benefiting from higher Pell grants; more kids are eligible. We're able to make sure that we can cap the amount of money that folks have to pay back each month on their student loans, because we recognized that a higher education cannot be a luxury. You can't just count on the fact that your parents are paying for your college education. A lot of kids need help. And that's good for the country. We're not going backwards on that, we're going to keep moving forward.I'm running because I want to continue to see America be the best innovator in the world. When you think about Benjamin Franklin--I just had a chance to talk to these outstanding students from a science and leadership academy who graduated. There are some of them over there, or at least some teachers. And I told them, what's America about? We've been about technology and discovery and invention, dating back to this guy. [Laughter]That's how we became an economic superpower. So the notion that we would now shortchange our investments in science and basic research, the possible cures for cancer or Alzheimer's or the clean energy that can make sure that we're doing something about climate change and saving money for families--that's not the answer, rolling back those investments. We've got to move forward. We're not going to move backwards. That's why I'm running for President of the United States again.I'm running because I want us to continue to build this country. We are a nation of builders. The mayor and I were talking as we were driving from the airport about all the projects, all the infrastructure, all the folks being put back to work making Philadelphia a more attractive place for people to do business.And all across the country, I want us to rebuild our roads and our bridges, our airports. I want us to build broadband lines and high-speed rail and wireless networks so that we have the platform for businesses to succeed all across this country. That's why I'm running for President. We're not going backwards. I want to put people back to work rebuilding America.I'm running because I believe in America's energy future. Since I've been President, oil production, up, natural gas production, up, oil imports, down under 50 percent. So we have focused on traditional sources of energy, but we've also doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars. We've also doubled the production of clean energy. I want us to control our own energy future, and we can put people back to work in the process. And that's why I'm running for President of the United States of America, because I believe we can achieve that.And I'm running for President because I want to do something about our debt and our deficits in a balanced and responsible way. And that is as sharp a contrast as we've got between my approach and what Republicans are peddling right now. And I think this is worth focusing on. They think somehow they've got a winner on this issue. Let's talk about the facts here.Remember, when the last Democratic President was in office, we had a surplus. By the time I got into office, we had a $1 trillion deficit because of tax cuts that weren't paid for, two wars that weren't paid for, a prescription drug plan that was not paid for. We had baked into the cake structural deficits that were made even worse by the financial crisis.And so for these folks suddenly to get religion--[laughter]--and say, man, deficits and Government spending--when they ran up the tab and are trying to pass off the bill to me--[laughter]--listen, let me tell you something. Even after you factor in all the work that we did to prevent us from slipping into a depression, the pace of growth of Government spending is lower under my administration than it has been in the last 50 years.The two Presidents with the least growth in Government spending in the modern era happen to be two Democrats named Barack Obama and Bill Clinton. It wasn't the other guys. And now you've got Mr. Romney proposing a $5 trillion tax cut. And he doesn't detail how it would be paid for, but if you go through the possibilities, then one of two things: either it's not paid for, in which case, that's $5 trillion that's piled on top of the debt we already have, passed onto the next generation, or it's going to come from middle class families all across this country. Those are the only two possibilities.And I'm running for President because we're not going to let that happen. We are not going to allow another millionaires' tax cut to result in cuts in basic research and science, and cuts in Head Start programs, and less help to States and cities who are putting folks back to work. We're not going to have poor and disabled and seniors who rely on Medicaid having to bear the brunt for another millionaires' tax cut. We're not going to voucherize Medicare.We've got to do something about the debt and deficits, and the way to do it is by making sure that, yes, we go after waste in Government. Not every Government program works. Not every proposal or program or policy the Government offers is ideal. But what we do have to make sure of is that we do it in a balanced way. So, even as we're paring back on things that don't work--and I've already signed $2 trillion of cuts into law already and have proposed $2 trillion in additional deficit reduction--even as we're making sensible cuts, even as we're reforming our health care system to make sure that the dollars we pay actually make us healthier, what we're not going to do is to make the most vulnerable people in our society, as well as the middle class, shoulder the burden. We're going to ask those like myself who are best equipped to help to do their fair share because that's part of the American bargain. Everybody gets a fair shot. Everybody does their fair share. Everybody plays by the same set of rules.That's what we mean when we say we're going forward. We're not going to relitigate Wall Street reform. That was the right thing to do. We're not going to relitigate health care reform. It was the right thing to do; 2.5 million young people who can stay on their parent's plan and now have health insurance who didn't otherwise have it. That was the right thing to do. Millions of seniors getting discounts on their prescription drugs, that was the right thing to do. Health care prevention and women being able to control their own health care decisions, that was the right thing to do. We're not going backwards, we're going forward.In 2008, I said I'd end the war in Iraq. I ended it. In 2008, I said we'd go after Al Qaida. And bin Laden is no longer a threat to this country and Al Qaida is on its heels. We are transitioning in Afghanistan, and by 2014, we have set a timeline, that war will be over. And we are going to use the savings that we get from ending these wars. Half of it will go to deficit reduction; the other half, we'll put to work rebuilding America, because this is the nation we need to build. That's what I mean when I say we're moving forward.We're not going to go back to the days when you couldn't serve in the military just because of who you love. ""Don't ask, don't tell"" was bad for America's security, and it was wrong, and we believe in the fairness and dignity and equality of all people. We're moving forward. We're not going backwards.We want to move forward and make sure that elections aren't just about $10 million checks being written by folks who have vested interests in maintaining the status quo. We want to move forward to make sure that we're creating an immigration system that reflects our tradition as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. Look, we are at our best when every voice is heard, when everybody has a stake. And that's not just a Democratic tradition. That is an American tradition. That's a tradition started by folks like Benjamin Franklin. That's the essence of our creed.If you look at our history, when we've made progress we've done it together. That's how this country got built. That's how my grandfather's generation was educated on a GI bill. That's how we built the Hoover Dam. That's how we sent a man to the Moon. We believe in individual initiative and the free market. We believe in entrepreneurs and risk takers being rewarded. We love folks getting rich--[laughter]--that's part of America's success.But we also understand there are some things we do together as a nation. That's the true lesson of our history. And that's the choice that we face in this election.Now, let me tell you, this election is going to be close, because folks have gone through a tough time. And no matter how many times you tell them, well, we avoided a whole bunch of really bad stuff, if you don't have a job, if your house is still underwater, if you haven't seen your income go up in a decade, you're still frustrated. You're still concerned about your kid's future. And rightly so.And the other side, they don't have any new ideas. I am telling you, I want you all to pay attention over the next 5 months and see if they're offering a single thing that they did not try when they were in charge, because you won't see it. It will be the same stuff. The same okeydoke. [Laughter] But you know what they do have is they'll have $500 million worth of negative ads. And they will tap into and feed into cynicism and a sense of frustration. And they'll try to direct blame. That's a campaign they know how to run.The thing is, though, what you guys taught me in 2008 was when Americans, when citizens decide to come together, when they say, it's time for change, when they start talking to their neighbors and their friends and they're really starting to pay attention in terms of who's saying what and asking themselves, how do we move this country forward, when you decide change needs to happen, guess what, it happens. It happens.And so I have never been more convinced about the strength and the dignity of the American people. I've never been more convinced about our prospects for the future, and the reason is because of you.As I travel all across this country, the American people constantly give me hope. They constantly give me cause for optimism. I still believe in you. And I told you back in 2008 that I wouldn't be--I wasn't a perfect man. Michelle would tell you that. [Laughter] And I wouldn't--I'd never be a perfect President, but I did say I'd always tell you what I thought and I'd always tell you where I stood. And I promised you I would wake up every single day thinking about how I can work as hard as I know how, to make your lives a little bit better and to make the lives of future generations a little bit better. And you know what? I've kept that promise.And so I hope you still believe in me. And if you're ready to go out there and work, if you're ready to join me and make phone calls and knock on doors, talk to your friends and talk to your neighbors, if you're willing to work even harder than you did in 2008, we'll finish what we started. We will move this country forward, and we'll remind the world just why it is the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"Thank you. Everybody, please have a seat. First of all, let me just thank David for all of his extraordinary efforts. There are a lot of longtime, hardcore supporters in this room, but David has been tireless, and Ruth has put up with him in support of my campaign back when people couldn't pronounce my name. And so I just couldn't be more grateful to them, and I just want to acknowledge all your leadership on this.I also want to acknowledge a couple of other extraordinary leaders--your outstanding mayor, Michael Nutter, who is here. One of my best friends in Washington or anywhere, Bob Casey is in the house. He's around here somewhere. And we have with us soon-to-be attorney general of the great State of Pennsylvania, Kathleen King [Kane]*, who is here.And all of you are here. And so because you are here I don't want to spend a lot of time giving a long speech--I just gave one--and many of you have had the chance to hear me in larger settings before. I want to take advantage of this more intimate setting so that we can have more of a conversation.Those numbers David provided are a good starting point for what this election is all about. I am very proud of the record and what we've done in this administration during as challenging a time as we've experienced in this country's history. But this election ultimately is also going to be about where we go from here, because as much progress as we've made, we've still got a lot of work to do. There's still too many people who are out of work, too many homes underwater, and middle class families still don't have confidence that the future for their kids and their grandkids are going to be brighter than their futures have been.And so the question in this election is going to be, whose vision is more likely to create that basic bargain, to affirm that basic bargain that made America the economic superpower and the greatest country on Earth? And that bargain says that if you work hard in this country, regardless of what you look like, where you come from, what faith you hold, who you love, that you can make it if you try.The question in this election is going to be, whose vision is most likely to lead us back to a point where economic growth is strong and is steady and is broad based so that people who are willing to take initiative and work hard can succeed; that we're not just a nation of consumers, but we're a nation of producers; that we're not just importing, but we're exporting; that we're a magnet for good, well-paying, middle class jobs in this society?And the choices in this election could not be starker. I said before, back in 2008, I had some strong disagreements with John McCain, but there were certain baselines that we both agreed on. We both agreed on things like immigration reform. We agreed on the existence of climate change. We agreed on the need to control campaign finance spending.This time out, across the board, there is just a fundamental disagreement, a difference of vision in terms of where we want to go. And Governor Romney's vision is pretty much in sync with the vision of the House Republican Party right now, and it can be described basically with two ideas. One is that we need to slash taxes even more, particularly for the wealthiest, most successful among us. And two, we need to eliminate any kind of regulations, whether consumer or worker regulations or environmental regulations, that in any way impede the free market from operating however it will.And the vision that I'm presenting in this campaign is consistent with what we talked about in 2008, and what I'm going to continue to talk about, and that we put into practice over the last 3 1/2 years, and that says: Government can't solve every one of our problems, and it shouldn't try; that there are some Government programs that don't work and should be ended; and there are some things that have to be done at a local level, but there are also some things that we have to do together.We have to invest in an education system that ensures we have the strongest, most skilled workforce on Earth. We have to invest together in things like basic research and science to ensure that we continue to innovate. Together, we've got to make sure that we continue to build the infrastructure for the 21st century, whether it's basics like roads and bridges, or it's things like broadband lines and improved Internet access and the kinds of things that will ensure that we're a platform for success for businesses coming from all around the world.Together, we've got to make sure that we reduce our debt and our deficit in a balanced way, where everybody is doing their fair share, so that we're not just relying on cuts to programs for the vulnerable or for our kids, but we're also asking those of us who have been incredibly blessed to be born in this country, for us to give a little back and to think about the future.And that's really what this election is going to come down to: Whose vision is more consistent with our history and those moments when we've been most successful as a country? And I think history is on our side and the facts are on our side. When you think of recent history, when did we grow fastest? It was when Bill Clinton decided we're going to raise taxes a little bit, close our deficit in a responsible way, make investments in the future. Prior to that, when did we grow fastest? In the postwar consensus, when the middle class was getting a decent wage and we began to invest in our infrastructure and our schools and our public colleges and universities and basic research and basic science and things like environmental protection and worker safety laws. Those didn't impede our growth, they accelerated our growth.And so I am looking forward to having this debate, and it's a debate that this country needs to have. Because I know a lot of folks are frustrated by gridlock. Well, the reason we've got gridlock is there is just an honest disagreement about how we need to move this country forward. And I'm looking forward to taking that debate to the American people. And the good news is, I think the American people agree with us. They're not following, as David said, the ups and downs, the ins and outs of this campaign. But they do have a sense of what's true, and they have pretty good instincts about what works. And they're not persuaded that an economy built on the notion that everybody here is on their own is somehow going to result in a stronger, more prosperous America.So our job is just to make sure that we get that message out, that the facts are presented fairly, that we push back against misinformation. But if we can just have a straight, honest, clear debate about the choices presented, then not only are we going to win this election, but more importantly, we're going to keep this country moving forward.So thank you very much, everybody.",2008,obama
"The President. Well, first of all, to Sarah Jessica and her whole crew--[laughter]--Matthew apparently had a show he had to run off to--but for them to let us crash their house, Secret Service tromping all over the place, is incredibly generous. And they've been great friends. Sarah Jessica is doing all kinds of stuff with our Arts and Humanities Council, and she has been a great leader and champion on behalf of the arts. And we could not thank her more for everything that she's done. So please give her a big round of applause.To Anna, who has been just a great friend, and I think this is--she is working really hard here in New York, but she actually was in Chicago as well, making things happen on our behalf. So thank you, Anna, for everything that you do.Now, I recognize that most of you are here to see Michelle. [Laughter] I understand. I have been there before. I always explain I rank fifth in the hierarchy in the White House. [Laughter] There's Michelle, my mother-in-law, the two girls, Bo--so that actually makes it six--[laughter]--in terms of star wattage. People come to the White House, first they ask, where's Michelle? They ask, where are the girls? And then they say, where's Bo? [Laughter] But that's okay. See, that's how you're thinking too, isn't it? [Laughter] It makes sense to you.But I do want to say--I don't get a chance to say this a lot publicly--some of you know that Michelle had some skepticism about a life in politics. I think that's well known. And so the grace and the strength and the poise and the warmth that she has brought to an extraordinarily difficult task as First Lady and still being the best mom imaginable couldn't make me prouder. And so I'm very pleased she's here. And this is sort of our date night, so--[applause].Now, because this is an intimate setting I usually don't give a long speech, and I already gave a long speech today. So what I'd rather do is spend most of my time taking questions and getting comments and advice. I usually get some advice. That's one of the things about the President--[laughter]--you have advisers everywhere. But let me just say a few things at the top.In 2008, when we came together, it was because we had a sense that some of the core values, the basic bargain that had made this country the extraordinary place it is had been betrayed, or at least misplaced. We had a country in which folks who didn't need them were getting tax cuts that exploded the deficit. We had two wars that were placed on a credit card. We had an economy that was doing very well for a few, but for a huge number of people--and a growing number of people--meant harder work for less pay, lower incomes, more stress.And Michelle and I, I think, embody the essence of an America in which, if you are willing to work hard, if you're willing to take responsibility not just for your own life, but for your community and your family, your neighborhood, that you can make it in this country, regardless of what you look like, where you come from, who you love, what your faith. And that basic bargain, that dream, felt like it was eroding. So that's why I ran in 2008, and that's why a lot of you supported me in 2008.What we didn't know was that we would end up experiencing the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression: 9 million people ultimately losing their jobs, millions of homes in foreclosure, people having a harder and harder time just making ends meet.And the good news is that because of the incredible resilience of the American people--and one of the great privileges of being President is you travel all across the country and you meet people from every walk of life--the good news is, because of their resilience, we've begun to come back.So we've created more than 4 million jobs over the last 27 months, 800,000 this year alone. We were able to stabilize the financial system. Manufacturing started coming back. Sometimes we had to make some tough choices like bailing out the auto industry. But because we had faith in those workers and we had faith in American ingenuity, GM is now back on top and--[applause]--that's worth applauding. Yes, why not? Why not? James has been dying to--he wanted to fire up the crowd a little bit.Audience member. He knows how to applause line.The President. Absolutely. And that was a good one, right on cue. [Laughter]But there are still a lot of people hurting out there. We have not come all the way back. And with what's happening in Europe and what's happening around the globe, the economy is fragile. And we have to remind ourselves of how much more we have to do not just to get back to where we were before the crisis hit, but how do we get back to that core American ideal in which everybody has a shot: everybody has a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same set of rules.And so, even as we try to address the crisis--that was our first order of business--what we also tried to do was slowly begin a process of reforming our institutions so that we can build a strong middle class and give a ladder of opportunity for people who are trying to get into the middle class.That's why we passed health care reform. That's the reason why we made sure that we reformed our financial system so we wouldn't go through the kind of crisis that we did in 2008. That's why we reformed our student loans system so millions of students have a better chance of going to college. That's why we invested in science and research, because we understand that's how we're going to be able to compete over the long term in this very competitive economy.And that's why I'm running for a second term, because our work is not yet done. We still have to put more people back to work. We still have to rebuild America. We still have to reform our immigration system to make sure that incredibly talented young people who grew up here, who understand themselves as Americans, but may have been brought here with parents who didn't have papers, that those kids have a chance to contribute, start businesses, and thrive and do all the things that remind us this is a nation of immigrants as well as a nation of laws.We've got to make sure that health care gets implemented. Having ended the war in Iraq, we have to now make sure that we're dealing with a transition in Afghanistan that's responsible, but ends the war by 2014. We have to continue to restore respect for America around the world, because we observe rule of law and we've eliminated torture and we've once again reached out to countries on the basis of our ideals and our values and not just our incredible military. And we've got to take care of our veterans who have fought for us and are now coming home, because they shouldn't have to fight for a job after they fought for us.So we've got a huge amount of work to do. And the speech that I gave today focused on the fact that we've still got a choice. We've got as fundamental a choice this time out as we've had maybe in 30, 40, 50 years.In some ways, this election is more important than 2008, because in 2008, as much as I disagreed with Mr. McCain, he believed in climate change. He believed in campaign finance reform. He believed in immigration reform. And now what we have is a Republican nominee and a Republican Party that has moved fundamentally away from what used to be a bipartisan consensus about how you build an economy; that has said our entire agenda is based on cutting taxes even more for people who don't need them and weren't asking for them, slashing our commitment to things like education or science or infrastructure or a basic social safety net for seniors and the disabled and the infirm; that wants to gut regulations for polluters or those who are taking advantage of consumers.So they've got a very specific theory about how you grow the economy. It's not very different from the one that actually got us into this mess in the first place. And what we're going to have to do is to present very clearly to the American people that choice. Because ultimately, you guys and the American people, you're the tie-breaker; you're the ultimate arbiter of which direction this country goes in. Do we go in a direction where we're all in this together and we share in prosperity, or do we believe that everybody is on their own and we'll see how it plays out?And I am absolutely convinced in my gut that we are in this together and that for all the differences that you hear about in the news and on cable, there is still a lot more that we have in common than what drives us apart. And I think our ideas are ones that the American people believe in.But we're going to have to fight for it, because the American people are tired. They've gone through a very tough economy. They're still having a tough time. And that's why this election is going to be close. Because at a certain point, the other side is going to spend $500 million with a very simple message, which is: You're frustrated, you're disappointed, and it's the fault of the guy in the White House. And that's a--it's an elegant message. It happens to be wrong, but it's crisp. You can fit it on a bumper sticker.And so we're going to have to work hard in this election. We're going to have to work harder than we did in 2008. But the good news is, from those travels around the country, I will tell you people remain hopeful, they remain resilient, and ultimately, they prefer our vision of the future. So we've just got to present it to them and go out and win an election, and then we're going to have to spend 4 more years doing a lot of work.And I want you to know, despite the fact that my hair is a little grayer than it was--[Laughter]--when I started on this journey, I've never been more determined and more convinced about the importance of our cause.Thank you, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"Thank you so much. Well, it is wonderful to see all of you.Let me begin my thanking a couple of folks who preceded me. First of all, the most important person, the true star of the Obama family--along with Malia, Sasha, and Bo--the First Lady of the United States, Michelle Obama. This is what qualifies as date night in the Obama household. [Laughter]I also want to thank Mariah Carey for performing this evening. We are grateful to her. Appreciate you. And somebody who can sing pretty good too, but also just is incredibly passionate about issues and ideas, and I'm so grateful for her friendship, Alicia Keys.So I think the way we're going to do this tonight is I want to actually spend some time in conversation with you, so we're going to do some Q&A later, and I'm going to just give a few brief remarks at the top.I was in Cleveland earlier today at Cuyahoga Community College. This is obviously a region that has been struggling, not just since 2008, but has been struggling for over a decade. And I described to them what was at stake in this election and explained that there is one area where I and my opponent completely agree, and that is that, as important as foreign policy is, as proud as I am to have ended the war in Iraq and made sure that we were providing the resources to go after Al Qaida and take out bin Laden, and the transition that we're working on in getting our troops home from Afghanistan, as important as social issues are, the crux of this campaign is going to be about the economy.Because when we came together in 2008, part of what compelled me to run and part of what I think brought a lot of people to support me was a belief in a basic bargain that here in America, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter who you love, no matter what your faith, if you are willing to work hard you should be able to make it. Not everybody will experience extraordinary monetary success, but you should be able to find a good job and make a good home and educate your kids so that they can achieve more than you ever dreamed of and retire with some dignity and some respect--the notion that if you show responsibility for yourself and your life, that you can succeed.And it was that basic bargain that built the greatest middle class in history. It's what made us an economic superpower. It wasn't the idea that the economy grew from the top down; it was the idea that it grew out from the middle, all kinds of people contributing, coming together, sharing in prosperity and sharing in responsibility not only for this generation, but for the next generation.And the sense was in 2008 that we had lost touch with those values and those ideals. We had squandered a surplus and turned it into deficits by giving tax cuts to folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them, two wars paid on a credit card. Manufacturing increasingly left our shores. A lot of our economic growth was built on debt and speculation. And we didn't know at the time when I started to run that we would end up with that entire house of cards collapsing and the result would be the worst financial crisis and the worst economic crisis in our lifetimes.We've spent 3 1/2 years working diligently--and when I say ""we,"" I don't just mean my administration, I mean the American people all across this country--working to recover from that crisis. We've created more than 4 million jobs over the last 27 months--more jobs than were created in the entire 7 years preceding my Presidency, 800,000 jobs just this year alone. But we lost 9 million jobs.We rebuilt and gave the opportunity for workers and businesses to begin to rebuild the auto industry and have started to see manufacturing grow again for the first time since the 1990s. But we lost 6 million jobs in the decade before as manufacturing moved offshore.We were able to stabilize the financial system. But millions of people all across the country saw their homes suddenly lose 10, 20, 30 percent of their value. And so as a consequence, we saw actually more wealth lost in that short span of time than was lost during the Depression.And so as much as we've done over the last 3 1/2 years, we've got a lot more work to do, because the hole that was dug was so deep. And what this election is going to come down to is where do we go from here? Because I have a fundamentally different vision about where we need to take this country than my opponent.And so all the gridlock in Washington, all the stalemate, all the questions as to why, for example, my jobs bill that I proposed that the economists said would create a million jobs hasn't passed, or the $4 trillion in deficit reduction that I proposed hasn't gotten done, part of it is politics. Part of it is the party that's not in the White House wanting to block a President who's in the White House. But part of it has to do with just a different conception of how we grow the economy.Mr. Romney and his congressional allies believe that if we not only extend the tax cuts that were passed under the previous administration, but also an addition $5 trillion--giving a lot of folks in this room big tax cuts--that that will somehow grow the economy faster. That if we strip away regulations on polluters or protections that are offered to consumers or workers, that that will unleash the marketplace. That's the essence of their prescription.Their analysis is, is that Government is the problem, and if we just prune it back to a few basics like national security and break it up and give it back in the form of tax cuts--particularly for the wealthiest Americans--that we will grow faster. And they will deliver on that vision if Mr. Romney is elected and Republicans control the Congress.So I don't necessarily question their sincerity, but I do question their understanding of how we built America. Because throughout most of our postwar era, the way we grew America was understanding that the market was the most powerful wealth generator in history, that we had a entrepreneurial culture and we rewarded risk takers and innovators, but we also understood there were some things we had to do together to make sure everybody had a shot, to make sure that everybody did their fair share, to make sure that everybody was playing by the same rules.And so we created public schools and public universities because we understood all of us would succeed if every talented kid had a chance to get a great education. And yes, that cost money, and we couldn't do it on our own. We had to do it together.And we understood that businesses are going to thrive if we've got great infrastructure, so we built railroads and highways and ports and airports, telecommunications lines, because we recognized that businesses have to move services and goods and information. And the faster we can do it, the more efficiently we can do it, the more all of us benefit.And we understood that if we invest in science and technology----[At this point, a cellular phone rang.]Whose phone is that? [Laughter] I'm just impressed because it was a really loud ring. [Laughter] That if we invested in science and technology, that wasn't necessarily something that we could do on our own, and it might not always be profitable for the private sector, but because of those investments, we laid the foundation for the Internet and GPS and medical breakthroughs, which then the private sector was able to take advantage of and commercialize and create jobs and businesses all across America.We understood that if we set up some rules of the road for our capital markets, small investors, and others would be more likely to put their money in because they figured they weren't getting cheated, which gave us the strongest capital markets in the world. We understood that if we put in place consumer protections and safety standards, that the American brand, our products people would have confidence in. And we couldn't do those things on our own; we had to do them together.The Hoover Dam, the Golden Gate Bridge, the GI bill, those things weren't bad for the marketplace. Those things facilitated the marketplace. It helped create our wealth.And so in this election, we are going to have a choice: Do we continue with that vision, which, by the way, used to have adherence not just in the Democratic Party, but also in the Republican Party. This used to be a postwar consensus. There would be arguments about how big government, how small government, but there was a basic understanding that there were some things we do better together.And so the reason I'm running is because I want to continue that tradition. That will provide us the kind of foundation we need to grow.And you've got on the other side a basic argument that says government is the enemy; the market for everything, that's the solution to our problems. And I'm not exaggerating here. As I pointed out in my speech today, if you look at what it would mean to provide an additional $5 trillion tax cut, the only way to pay for it without just exploding the deficit would be to cut out 20 percent of that part of the budget that includes education, includes basic research--just about everything except Medicare, Social Security, national defense would be cut--20 percent.That doesn't get you $5 trillion, though, so you'd then also have to raise taxes in one way or another on the middle class in order to pay for it. And that doesn't deal with the existing deficit; that's just the $5 trillion deficit that would be created if we have these additional tax cuts.If you roll back the health care bill that we passed, it's estimated that millions of people will not have health insurance and then millions more if we carry out what's been proposed in terms of cutting Medicaid: vulnerable kids, kids with autism or disabilities, or folks in nursing homes.Now, I understand the argument the other side is making. The problem is, is that we tried it just a few years ago. And it was exactly that theory that led to sluggish economic growth, sluggish job growth, huge deficits, and ultimately resulted in a financial crash. So the question is why would we think that it would work now? What evidence do we have that this theory would make sense?But that's the great thing about democracy: You can present a plan even if it doesn't make sense. [Laughter] And you can make your argument for it. But the point I tried to make today--and this is what we're going to be doing over the next 5 months--is I want absolute clarity on the part of the American people about which way we're going.I believe in making sure that we're investing in clean energy, in solar and wind, because I think that will create jobs and I think it's good for our national security and I think it will reduce our dependence on foreign oil and I think it's good for climate change. Mr. Romney disagrees. I want to have that debate.I believe we have to invest in education at the K-through-12 level. We're going to reform the system, but we also have to hire new teachers, pay them better, hold them accountable, but stop teaching to the test. And yes, that's going to require some resources. Mr. Romney wants to cut back on those resources. I want to have that debate.I believe we have to rebuild America, and we should rebuild America right now. We've got trillions of dollars in deferred maintenance that we're going to at some point have to replace unless we intend to become a second-rate power. And we could put thousands of people to work doing it right now here in New York and all across the country. Mr. Romney disagrees. I want to have that debate.I want to reduce the deficit, but I want to do it in a balanced way. I think everybody should do their fair share and we shouldn't balance it on the backs of folks who are the most vulnerable when we can afford to do a little bit more. Mr. Romney has a different theory, and I want to have that debate.So let me just close by saying this. Over the next 5 months, you won't be seeing a lot of ads because, frankly, Manhattan is not a battleground State. [Laughter] But out in those battleground States, they will be seeing not just millions of dollars of ads, but potentially over a billion dollars of negative ads. And the message will be very simple: The economy is not where it needs to be, and it's Obama's fault. That's their message. There are no new ideas; there's no new proposals. What they're promising is what Bill Clinton called the same policies as the last time except on steroids. [Laughter] But you know people are anxious, and they've gone through a really tough time, and sometimes, just making an argument that feeds into that dissatisfaction can be enough.So this will be a close election. The good news is, I believe we are right. I believe the American people understand that what made this country great was not a fend-for-yourself economy, but one in which all of us feel a sense of buy-in and all of us feel a sense of obligation and commitment, a sense of citizenship. And what we also learned in 2008 is that when the American people decide something is right and something is true, regardless of all the money and all the cynicism and all the nonsense that passes for political campaigns these days--and that we always have to guard against getting sucked into because we're just in this muddy field--despite all that, the American people decide what's right and what's true, they can change the country.That's the bet we made in 2008; that's the bet I'm making now. And I hope you are ready to work just as hard as you did 4 years ago, because in many ways this election is even more important. And if you do, then I think I'll have 4 more years to finish the job.Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Tampa! Oh, it is good to be back in Tampa, Florida! I was so fired up, I missed a stair. [Laughter] I couldn't wait to get out here. Well, how's everybody doing today?Couple of people I want to acknowledge. First of all, the outstanding mayor of your fair city, Bob Buckhorn's in the house. Florida's own, the chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, Debbie Wasserman Shultz is here. And the chair of the Florida Democratic Party, Rod Smith is in the house.And all of you are here.Audience members. Fired up! Ready to go! The President. Well----Audience members. Fired up! Ready to go! Fired up! Ready to go! Fired up! Ready to go!The President. Thank you.Listen, Tampa, I'm here not only because I need your help. But I'm also here because the country needs your help. For the past 3 years, we've been battling our way back from the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. Not only are we digging out of a hole that's 9 million jobs deep, we're digging out of an entire decade where manufacturing left our shores; where costs rose, but incomes weren't going up; where middle class families fell further and further behind. It was a decade where two wars and trillions of dollars in tax cuts were put on our Nation's credit card, turning a record surplus into record deficits.Now, today, our economy is growing again, but it needs to grow faster. Our businesses have created over 4 million jobs in the last 27 months. But we need to create more, and they need to pay better. I signed a law that will reduce our deficit by $2 trillion, but we've got to do more work on our deficit. One of the most urgent tasks is recovering from this immediate crisis, but the economy won't be truly healthy until we reverse that much longer erosion of the middle class, until we restore the basic American bargain that says if you work hard in this country, you can get ahead and own a home and send your kids to college and retire with dignity and respect.Now, here's the thing, Florida. What's holding us back from meeting these challenges is not the lack of good ideas, it's not the lack of technical solutions. By now, just about every policy and proposal has been laid out there on the table. What is holding us back is a stalemate between two fundamentally different views in Washington about which direction we should go in.This isn't just one of the run-of-the-mill political arguments you hear about in Washington sometimes. This is the defining issue of our time. We're in a make-or-break moment for the middle class. And the next President and the next Congress will face a set of decisions--on the economy and on the deficit and on taxes--that will have an enormous impact on this country not just today, but the country that we pass on to our children.And you know what, the outcome of this decision, this choice, is entirely up to you. It's up to you: the people of Tampa, the people of Florida, the American people.Now, Governor Romney and his allies----Audience members. Boo!The President. They're patriotic Americans. They've got wonderful families. But they believe that we should go back to the top-down economics of the last decade.Audience members. No!The President. They figure that if we simply eliminate regulations and cut taxes by trillions of dollars, then the market will solve all of our problems.You see? You heard that? [Laughter] I'm just saying.No, wait, wait, that's their argument. They argue that if we help corporations and wealthy investors maximize their profits by whatever means necessary--whether through layoffs or outsourcing or union-busting--that it will automatically translate into jobs and prosperity that benefit all of us. That's their theory. That's their theory.But I believe they're wrong. I think they're wrong. I believe we should do everything we can to help our entrepreneurs succeed. I want our companies to be as profitable as they can be. But that alone is not enough. Because the central challenge we face right now, the challenge that we've faced for over a decade, is that bigger profits haven't led to better jobs. Bigger profits haven't led to higher incomes.And the reason is, in this country, in America, prosperity has never come from the top down; it comes from a strong and growing middle class and all those people who are striving and working to get into the middle class. It comes from successful, thriving small businesses that grow into medium-sized businesses and then large businesses.We don't need more top-down economics. What we need is some middle-class-out economics, some bottom-up economics. We need a plan for better education and for better training, for energy independence, for innovation, for infrastructure that can rebuild America. What we need is a Tax Code that encourages companies to create jobs and manufacturing here in the United States and that asks the wealthiest Americans to help pay down our deficit, to do their fair share.Tampa, that's the way forward. That's where I want to take this country over these next 4 years. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. Now, listen, there's no mystery about where the other side will take us if they win the election. I mean, their economic plan has been voted on in Congress. Governor Romney has it right there on his website. So look, first, they promise to roll back all kinds of regulations on banks and polluters and insurance companies and oil companies.Audience members. Boo!The President. That's part of--first part of their plan. Second part of their plan: They don't just want to keep all the Bush tax cuts in place, the ones for the wealthiest Americans, they want to keep those in place; then, they want to add another $5 trillion in tax cuts on top of that----Audience members. Boo!The President. ----including a 25-percent tax cut for every millionaire in the country.Audience members. Boo!The President. Now, I can tell this is a sophisticated group, so--[laughter]--so you might be wondering, how do they spend $5 trillion on new tax cuts and then, with a straight face, say that their plan would reduce the deficit? How do they do that? This is a good question. Now--well, let me tell you. They start by proposing a trillion dollars in cuts to things like education and training and medical research and clean energy.Audience members. No!The President. But that's not enough. That's only a trillion dollars; they've got all this--4 trillion to go. So then, they propose eliminating health care for about 50 million Americans.Audience members. No!The President. And then, they propose turning Medicare into a voucher program. But, you know what, that's still not enough. So, as it was reported in the newspaper just this week, they'll also have to raise taxes on the middle class by taking away tax deductions for everything from health care to college to retirement to homeownership.Audience members. Boo!The President. And that could cost some families thousands of dollars. So think about that. To pay for another $250,000 tax cut for the average millionaire, they want you to foot the bill.Audience members. Boo!The President. Let me see a show of hands: Is there anybody here who can afford to pay thousands of dollars to give people like me and Mr. Romney another tax cut?Audience members. No!The President. Come on, go ahead and raise your hand. Don't be shy. [Laughter]Now, look, that's their entire economic plan. That's it. When Mr. Romney tells us he's some sort of financial wizard who can fix our economy, that's how he intends to do it.And Bill Clinton has pointed out that this Republican agenda, it's nothing new. It's nothing more than the same thing we tried during the last administration, except on steroids. [Laughter]Now, here's the thing. I have not seen a single nonpartisan expert say that the other side's economic plan would actually reduce the deficit in the long term. I haven't seen a single independent economist say it would create jobs in the short term. In fact, one said it would push us even deeper into recession.But, you know what, if people still think their plan sounds like a good idea----[At this point, a baby cried.]The President. See? Somebody is depressed about this plan. They're hearing about it--[Laughter]--I know, it's heartbreaking. [Laughter]But if somebody out there thinks that's a good idea, if they want to give the policies of the last decade another try, then they should vote for Mr. Romney. That's how our democracy works. They should reelect the Republicans who've been running for Congress. That's what our democracy is all about. And together, Mr. Romney and a Republican Congress will take America back down this path that we've tried and didn't work the last time.But if you believe we need a better plan, if you believe we need a middle class plan that grows our economy and shrinks our deficit, then we need to win this election. We need to move this country forward.Despite what you'll hear from the other side, my plan isn't based on some belief that Government has the answer to all our problems. Over the last 3 years, I've cut taxes for the typical working family by $3,600. I've cut taxes for small businesses 18 times. I want a Government that is leaner and smarter, one that's designed for the 21st century, more responsive to the American people.So look, I don't believe every regulation is smart or that every tax dollar is spent wisely. I don't believe that we should be in the business of helping people who refuse to help themselves. But I do share the belief of our first Republican President, a guy from my home State named Abraham Lincoln, who said that through Government, we should do together what we can't do as well for ourselves.That's how we built this country, together. Sure, Democrats and Republicans have always disagreed on certain policies and programs. But throughout our history, at least our modern history, there's been a shared belief that, yes, we're a great market economy, but the market can't solve all its problems on our own.So that's why FDR worked with Republicans and Democrats to send a generation of returning veterans to college on the GI bill, an investment that led to the largest middle class, the most prosperous economy in our history. They understood that people succeed when they have a chance to get a decent education and learn new skills and the businesses that hire those people benefit as well and the companies they start benefit as well. That was not just a Democratic belief, that was an American belief.President Eisenhower, a Republican, he launched the Interstate Highway System and a new generation of scientific research. He understood that for companies to grow and hire, they need access to the best transportation and the fastest communication, the most cutting-edge innovation.Ronald Reagan worked with Democrats to save Social Security and pay down the deficit by, yes, asking the wealthiest Americans to pay a little bit more in taxes. They understood that our economy is stronger when we don't balance our budget on the backs of middle class and poor Americans. We do it best when everybody does their fair share.So Governor Romney and the Republican leaders in Congress, they've rejected what used to be this bipartisan tradition. They've opted for top-down, on-your-own economics that has never succeeded in this country. And I've got a different view. I have an economic plan based on the shared vision that's always worked for America's middle class and all those striving to get there, a plan focused on education and energy and innovation and infrastructure and a Tax Code that is fair and responsible. That's how we're going to build this country. That's why I'm running for President of the United States.So first, we're going to make sure that every American has a chance to get the skills and training that today's jobs require. I--my plan would recruit an army of new teachers, pay them better, hire more teachers in areas like math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges like this one and learn skills that local businesses are looking for right now. I want to make higher education affordable for every American who's willing to work for it, not just by offering more loans and financial aid, but also by getting schools to hold down the cost of college tuition.Second, under my plan, we're going to move towards a future where we control our own energy. That's something that's good for our economy, good for our environment, good for our national security. So we need to end Government subsidies to oil companies; they're making a lot of money on their own. Let's double down on clean energy that's never been more promising, on wind power and solar power, biofuels and fuel-efficient cars. I want to put in place a new standard that makes clean energy the profitable kind of energy for every business in America.Number three, we're going to make sure the United States of America is the best place on Earth for innovation and science and discovery. So my plan would give companies a permanent tax credit for research and development that they do here in America. We'll double down on public research that laid the foundation for the Internet and GPS and Google and all the companies and jobs that followed. That's who we are. We are innovators. We create things. We don't just buy things from other countries. We create things here in America and build them here in America.And then, we're going to take half the money we're no longer spending on war, and we're going to use it to do some nation-building here at home. If we want businesses to thrive here, we got to put people back to work rebuilding our roads and our runways, our wireless networks, our ports. And what I'm pushing for is an independent fund that will attract private dollars and issue loans for new construction projects just based on two criteria: how badly are they needed and how much good will they do for the economy. We don't need bridges to nowhere. We need bridges to help businesses move goods and services and people all across the country and all around the world.And fifth, we're going to reduce our deficit by $4 trillion. I have a detailed plan. We'll cut spending we can't afford. We'll strengthen programs like Medicare for the long haul. We can reform our Tax Code in a way that is fair and responsible, which, by the way, means let's stop giving tax breaks to businesses that ship jobs and factories overseas. Let's reward companies that create jobs in manufacturing right here in the United States of America.Now, Mr. Romney disagrees with this. Today it was reported in the Washington Post that the companies his firm owned were ""pioneers"" in the outsourcing of American jobs to places like China and India. Pioneers. Let me tell you, Tampa, we do not need an outsourcing pioneer in the Oval Office. We need a President who will fight for American jobs and fight for American manufacturing. That's what my plan will do. That's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. And look, to get our deficit under control without sacrificing all the investments I've talked about--everything that we need to grow the economy--my plan, yes, will ask the wealthiest Americans to pay a little bit more, just like they did when Bill Clinton was President, just like they did when our economy created 23 million new jobs and the biggest budget surplus in history and a whole lot of millionaires to boot. And there are--look, there are plenty of patriotic, very successful Americans who'd be willing to make this contribution again because they believe in this country.So this is about choices. I don't believe that giving millionaires and billionaires a $250,000 tax cut is more valuable to our future than hiring transformative teachers or providing financial aid to kids who need it to go to college. I don't believe that kind of tax cut is more likely to create jobs than providing loans to new entrepreneurs or tax credits to small businesses who hire veterans. I don't think it's more likely to spur economic growth than our investments in clean energy and medical research, in building new roads and bridges and expanding our ports and our runways.So Governor Romney disagrees with my vision. And his allies in Congress disagree with my vision. Neither of them will endorse any policy that asks the wealthiest Americans to pay even a nickel more in taxes. Not a penny more. It's the reason--that's the reason we haven't reached an agreement on how to reduce our deficit. That's the reason my jobs bill that would put a million more people back to work has been voted down by Republicans in Congress time and time again. It is the biggest source of gridlock in Washington and has been over the last 3 years. So, Tampa, here's the thing. Only you can break that stalemate. In this election, you have the final say about where we go. After a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives and over a trillion dollars, you can decide whether we keep our brave men and women in Afghanistan indefinitely, like Mr. Romney wants to do, or whether we stick to the timeline that will finally bring our troops home.You can decide--did something just fall down there? [Laughter] That's why we need infrastructure, right there.You can decide whether we're going to have another political fight about ending a woman's right to choose and getting rid of Planned Parenthood and taking away access to birth control. Or you can decide that women should control their own health care choices.You can decide: You choose whether to refight the battles we just had over financial reform and health care reform. Or you can decide that ending taxpayer bailouts of Wall Street banks was the right thing to do and that allowing 3 million young people to stay on their parent's health insurance plan is the right thing to do and that preventing insurance companies from discriminating against people with preexisting conditions is the right thing to do. You can decide.You can decide whether we're going back to the days when you could be kicked out of the United States military just because of who you are and who you love.You can decide whether it's time to stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they're the children of undocumented immigrants.You can decide that this is--becomes the last election where multimillion-dollar donations that are undisclosed somehow speak louder than the voices of ordinary citizens.So you know what, Tampa, this is up to you. This is up to you. From now until November, the other side will spend more money than we have ever seen in the history of the Republic. And all that money is going to be spent on ads telling you that the economy is bad, it's all my fault, and I can't fix it because Government is always the answer, according to me. [Laughter] Or because I didn't make a lot of money in the private sector, or because I'm in over my head, or because I think everybody's doing just fine. [Laughter] They will have ad after ad after ad, and all of them will have scary voices. [Laughter] They'll have pictures of me looking all old and--[laughter]--broke down. You've seen those ads. You've seen them. That's what Mr. Romney's going to say. That's what the Republicans in Congress will say.And that may be their plan to win an election, but it's sure not a plan to create jobs. It's not a plan to grow the economy. It's not a plan to pay down the debt. It's not a plan to restore the middle class and restore the American Dream.You deserve better than that. At such a big moment in our history, at a time when so many people are struggling, you deserve a real debate about the economic plans we're proposing. And then, make a choice: If there's anybody who believes the best way to grow our economy and create jobs is eliminating regulations and cutting $5 trillion worth of taxes, they should vote for Governor Romney and the Republicans who run Congress. God bless them.Audience members. No!The President. Because those folks--because that's what they're proposing. They are more than qualified to take us in that direction.But if you believe we need a plan for education and energy and innovation and infrastructure, if you believe this economy grows best when everybody's got a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody's playing by the same rules, if you believe that everybody should be able to succeed if they're working hard, no matter where they come from or what they look like, what their last name is or who they love, then I ask that you stand with me for a second term as President of the United States. I----Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. You know--in fact, I ask everybody--I want you guys--vote for anybody else--Democrat, Independent, or Republican--who shares this belief in how we grow an economy that is good for everybody and not just some. I will work with anybody of any party who believes that we're in this together, who believes that we rise or fall as one Nation and one people.Don't let anybody tell you we lack the capacity to meet our challenges. We're Americans. The only thing lacking right now is our politics. And we can solve that. That's what your vote is for.So I need you to hit the doors. I need you to make some phone calls. I need you to register your friends, get your family members going. Get on Facebook, get on Twitter.I know since the last time I ran that my hair is a little grayer--[laughter]--and I know that we've been through some tough times together. But I promised you back in 2008 that I would always tell you what I thought and I'd always tell you where I stood. And I promised you that I would wake up every single day thinking about you and fighting for you. And, Tampa, I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise. I still believe in you. I need you to still believe in me.And if we're out there working together, we can finish what we started and remind the world how a strong economy is built and why the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, New Hampshire! Hello, Durham! Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you, everybody. It is great to be back in New Hampshire.A couple of people I want to acknowledge. First of all, wasn't Scott outstanding? Give Scott a big round of applause for his introduction. I want to thank Todd Allen, who is the principal here at Oyster River High School, and I want to thank our outstanding Senator from New Hampshire, Jeanne Shaheen. And I want to thank all of you.I know it's a little warm in here. [Laughter] That's okay. That's okay. It is wonderful to be back. And I just have so many good memories here in New Hampshire, and I see some familiar faces and folks who were with me when people were still figuring out how to pronounce my name. [Laughter]Audience member. We love you!The President. I love you guys back. I really do.Now, I am back here in New Hampshire not just because I need your help--although I do--but more importantly, I'm here because your country needs your help.In 2008, we came together to reclaim the basic bargain that built this country, the basic ideal of this country, the thing that created the largest middle class, the most prosperous nation in the history of the world. We came together because we believe that in America, your success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth.If you are willing to work--here in the United States of America, if you are willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job. If you're willing to meet your responsibilities, you should be able to take care of your family and own a home, maybe start a business, give your kids a better chance than you had, no matter who you are, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter who you love. That's what we believe. That's what America is about.That's why we came together. That's why so many of you got involved in 2008. It wasn't because you thought my election was a sure thing. When you support a guy named Barack Obama--[laughter]--you know that's not a guarantee. But we shared that common sense of what America has been, and is, and must be for the future.I ran for this office because for more than a decade, that basic bargain, that profound American Dream had been slipping away from too many people. Before I took office, the worst economic crisis of our lifetime made it even worse.So, Durham, the debate in this election is not whether we need to do better. Everybody understands that our economy isn't where it needs to be. There are too many people out there who are struggling, too many folks out of work, too many homes that are still underwater. Of course, we need to do better. The debate is not whether; it is how. How do we grow the economy faster? How do we create more jobs? How do we pay down our debt? How do we reclaim that central American promise that no matter who you are, you can make it here if you try?And this is not just the usual run-of-the-mill political argument. This is not the usual Washington chatter. There's a lot of that. But this, this is the defining issue of our time. This is a make-or-break moment for our middle class and folks who are aspiring to get into the middle class. The next President and the next Congress will face a set of decisions--on the economy, on deficits, on taxes--that will have a profound impact, not only on the country we live in today, but the country that we pass on to our kids.And here's why you're so important, because what's holding us back from meeting the challenges we face is not the lack of big ideas, it's not the lack of technical solutions. Just about every policy and proposal, by now, has been put on the table; everybody knows what the options are. What's holding us back is a stalemate in Washington between two fundamentally different visions of which direction we should go.And, New Hampshire, this election is your chance to break the stalemate. This election is your chance to move this country forward instead of seeing it go backwards. That's why I'm here. That's why I need your help.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. Governor Romney and his allies in Congress, they believe--they have a certain idea about how they would proceed if they're in power. They think that we should go back to the top-down economic policies of the last decade.They believe that if we eliminate regulations and we cut taxes by trillions of dollars, that the market will solve all of our problems on its own. They argue that if we help corporations and wealthy investors maximize their profits by whatever means necessary--whether it's through layoffs or outsourcing or whatever steps it takes to maximize those profits--that that automatically translates into jobs and prosperity for you.Now, just last week, it was reported that Governor Romney's old firm owned companies that were pioneers in the business of outsourcing American jobs to places like China and India. Now----Audience members. Boo!The President. So yesterday his advisers were asked about this and they tried to clear this up by telling us there's actually a difference between ""outsourcing"" and ""offshoring."" [Laughter] That's what they said. You cannot make this stuff up. [Laughter]Now, what Governor Romney and his advisors don't seem to understand is this: If you're a worker whose job went overseas, you don't need somebody trying to explain to you the difference between outsourcing and offshoring. You need somebody who's going to wake up every single day and fight for American jobs and investment here in the United States. That's what you need. That's why I'm running.Unlike Governor Romney, I want to close the outsourcing loophole in our Tax Code. I want to give tax breaks to companies who create jobs and manufacturing here in New Hampshire, here in the United States of America.But what's important to understand is Governor Romney's commitment to outsourcing is not just part of his record, it's part of an overall economic vision that he and Republicans in Congress want to implement if they win this election.Audience member. Hell no! [Laughter]The President. And look, their plan is pretty simple. It's been voted on in Congress. It's right there on Governor Romney's website. First of all, they promise to roll back all kinds of regulations on banks and polluters and insurance companies and oil companies.Audience members. Boo!The President. So that's step number one. And then, second, they promise not only to keep all of the Bush tax cuts in place--not just the ones for the middle class, but for everybody, for the wealthiest Americans--but they also then want to add another $5 trillion in tax cuts on top of that, including a 25-percent tax cut for every millionaire in the country.Audience members. Boo!The President. Now, you may be wondering--because I can tell--[laughter]--you're scratching your head here--you may be wondering how do they spend $5 trillion on new tax cuts and still keep a straight face when they say that their plan would reduce our deficit? This is a good question. Well, they say that they'll start by proposing $1 trillion in cuts to things like education and training----Audience members. No!The President. ----and medical research and clean energy. But that's only $1 trillion. They've got $5 trillion that they want to pay for, right? So that's not enough. So they also propose eliminating health care for about 50 million Americans and turning Medicare into a voucher program.Audience members. Boo!The President. But that's still not enough. Still haven't gotten to the $5 trillion yet. So then, they'll also have to raise taxes on the middle class by taking away tax benefits for everything from health care to college to retirement to homeownership, and this could cost some families thousands of dollars.So think about this. To pay for another $250,000 tax cut for the average millionaire, they're going to ask you to foot the bill.Audience member. We can't afford it!The President. I figure you can't afford it. [Laughter] Is there anybody here who can afford to pay thousands of dollars to give folks like Mr. Romney or me another tax cut?Audience members. No!The President. Unfortunately, that is their entire economic plan. That's it. When Mr. Romney tells us he's some sort of financial wizard who can fix our economy, that's exactly how he intends to do it.Now, there may be some people--in fact, I know there are some people--who think this kind of plan is a good idea. They want to give the policies of the last decade another try. And if they do, they should vote for Mr. Romney. They should reelect the Republicans who've been running Congress. Together, they will take America back down this path that we tried.I believe they're wrong. I believe their policies were tested, and they failed. And that--my belief is not just based on some knee-jerk partisan reaction. It's based on the fact that we tried it. And you look at our economic history. In this country, prosperity has never come from the top down. It comes from a strong and growing middle class. It comes from successful, thriving small businesses.We don't need more top-down economics. What we need is a better plan for education and training and energy independence and infrastructure and innovation that rebuilds America. What we need is a Tax Code that encourages companies to create jobs and manufacturing here in the United States and that asks the wealthiest Americans to pay a little bit more to help pay down our deficit.Listen, we don't expect Government to solve all our problems, and it shouldn't try to solve all our problems. And I learned from my mom, no education policy can take the place of a parent's love and attention and sometimes scolding. [Laughter] As a young man, I worked with a group of Catholic churches who taught me that no poverty program can make as much of a difference as the kindness and commitment and involvement of caring neighbors and friends and fellow parishioners.Over the last 3 years, I cut taxes for the typical working family by $3,600. I cut taxes for small businesses 18 times. I don't believe every regulation is smart, or that every tax dollar is spent wisely. I don't believe we should be in the business of helping people who refuse to help themselves. But let me tell you what I do believe.I share the belief of our first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, that through government, we should do together what we cannot do as well for ourselves.And that's how we built this country, together. We built railroads and highways, and the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge. We did that together. We did big things together. We sent my grandfather's generation to college on the GI bill. We did that together.We invented amazing scientific technologies and medical breakthroughs because we invested in basic research and science. We did those things together. We didn't do those things for any particular individual, any particular group, but we understood that by making these common investments, everybody would have the platform, everybody would have the capacity to do better. It would make us all richer--together. It gave all of us opportunity--together.We moved forward together, as one Nation and as one people. And that is the right lesson for our future. That's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States, because I want us all to move forward--together.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. I'm running to make sure that every American has a chance to get the skills and training that today's jobs require. My plan would recruit an army of new teachers, pay those teachers better. I want to hire more teachers in areas like math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses are looking for right now. And I want to make higher education affordable for every American who's willing to work for it, not just by offering more loans and financial aid, but by holding down the costs of a college tuition.A college education can't be a luxury. It's a vital necessity for everybody. It may not be a 4-year college; it may be a 2-year college, it may be a technical school, but everybody is going to need the skills they need to compete. And that's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President.Now, I'm running so that we have a future where we control our own energy, and that's good for our economy, our security. It's good for our environment. So my plan would end Government subsidies to oil companies that are making plenty of profits. Let's double down on clean energy: wind power and solar power, next generation of biofuels, fuel-efficient cars. That's the choice in this election.I'm running to make sure that the United States of America is the best place on Earth for innovation and discovery, which is why my plan would give companies a permanent tax credit for research and development that they do here in America, and we double down on the public research that's helped lay the foundation for the Internet and GPS and Google, and the countless companies and jobs that follow.I'm running so that after a decade of war, we can start doing some nation-building here at home. So we've ended the war in Iraq. We are transitioning in Afghanistan. My plan would take half the money we're no longer spending on war, use it to put people back to work rebuilding our roads and our runways and our ports and our wireless networks. That's the choice in this election.I'm running so that we can reduce our deficit in a responsible way, by $4 trillion, doing it in a balanced, responsible way----Audience member. The way it was done before.The President. The way it was done before. I put forward a detailed plan. It will cut spending we can't afford. And there's some programs that don't work--we can eliminate that money--strengthen programs like Medicare for the long haul, reform our Tax Code so that the wealthiest Americans pay a little bit more, just like they did when Bill Clinton was President; just like they did when our economy created 23 million new jobs.I mean, think about it, we created 23 million new jobs, the biggest budget surplus in history--and by the way, we produced a lot of millionaires too. There's no contradiction here. And there are plenty of patriotic, successful Americans, a lot of business leaders, a lot of folks who'd be willing to make this contribution again if they were asked to help pay down the deficit and they saw it as part of a responsible, balanced plan.This is about choices. I don't believe that giving millionaires and billionaires a $250,000 tax cut is going to do more for our future than hiring transformative teachers or providing financial aid to the children of middle class families. I don't believe a poorly designed tax cut like that is more likely to create jobs than providing loans to new entrepreneurs or tax credits to small businesses who hire veterans. I don't think it's more likely to spur economic growth than investments in clean energy and medical research, and new roads and bridges and runways.Audience member. Eldercare.The President. Or eldercare.So Governor Romney, he fundamentally disagrees with my vision. That's what elections are about. His allies in Congress disagree with my vision. Neither of them will endorse any policy that asks the wealthiest Americans to pay even a nickel more in taxes.That's the reason we haven't reached an agreement on our deficit. It's the reason my jobs bill that would put more than 1 million people back to work has been voted down by Republicans in the Congress again and again and again. It's been the biggest source of gridlock in Washington for the last 3 years.And, New Hampshire, the only thing that can break this stalemate is you--in you. In this election, on every single challenge that we face, you've got the final say. That's the amazing thing about our democracy.You can decide whether we keep our brave men and women in Afghanistan indefinitely, like Mr. Romney wants to do, or whether we stick to the timeline that I've set to finally bring our troops home. That's up to you.You can decide that instead of restricting access to birth control or defunding Planned Parenthood, we should make sure that in this country, women control their own health care choices. That's up to you.You can decide whether we keep Wall Street reform; whether ending taxpayer bailouts for Wall Street banks was the right thing to do; whether preventing insurance companies from discriminating against people who are sick is the right thing to do; whether over 3 million young people being able to stay on their parent's health insurance plan is the right thing to do.You can decide whether or not we go back to the days when you could be kicked out of the United States military just because of who you are and who you love. You can decide whether or not it's time to stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they're the children of undocumented workers--who have been growing up with our kids and want to contribute to this country.It's going to be up to you whether we continue seeing these elections where multimillion-dollar donations, one person writing a $10 million check--whether that speaks louder than the voices of ordinary citizens. It's all up to you.This is going to be a close election. And from now until November, the other side will spend more money than at any time in American history. And almost all of it will be on ads that tell you the economy is bad--it's all Obama's fault. He can't fix it because he thinks government is always the answer; because he doesn't have the experience of making a lot of money in the private sector; or because he is in over his head; or because he thinks everything is just fine. That's what the scary voices in the ads will tell you over and over and over again. That's what Mitt Romney will say. That's what the Republicans in Congress will say. And I give them credit. They have a lot of message discipline. They just repeat over and over and over again the same thing. Doesn't matter if it's true, they'll just keep on repeating. That's what they do.But, you know what, that may be a plan to win the election; it's sure not a plan to create jobs. It's not a plan to grow the economy. It's not a plan to pay down our debt. It's not a plan to revive the middle class and restore the American Dream.So, Durham, if you believe we need a plan for education and energy, for infrastructure and innovation; if you believe that our economy grows best when everybody has a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules, then I'm going to need you to stand with me as I run for a second term as President. I'm going to need you. The country is going to need you.And here in New Hampshire, I know you guys have a tradition--a lot of Independents out here. Listen, I'm asking you, vote for anybody else--Democrat, Independent, Republican--anybody who shares your views about how this country should move forward. I will work with anyone of any party who believes that we are in this together, that we rise or fall as one Nation and as one people.It's fashionable right now for people to be cynical. We go in cycles like this, and right now a lot of people are saying, oh, America is doing terribly and this and that, and what are we going to do. Let me tell you something. There's no problem out there, no challenge we face, that we do not have the capacity to solve. We are Americans, and we are tougher than whatever tough times may bring us. And what's lacking right now is our politics. What's lacking right now is that some of the worst impulses in our politics have been rewarded. And that's something entirely within your power to solve.And in 2008, we made a commitment to each other. We said, together, we can bring about change, even against opposition, even against all kinds of nonsense going on in the campaigns. What we saw, what we witnessed, was that when Americans as citizens come together, nothing can stop them.And I made a commitment to you. I said, you know what, I'm not going to be a perfect President. I'm not a perfect man--Michelle can tell you that. [Laughter] But you know what I did say? I said--some of you may remember this--I said I will always tell you where I stand, I will always tell you what I think, what I believe. And I will wake up every single day, fighting as hard as I can for you, fighting as hard as I know how for American families who are out there working hard, who are out there striving, who are doing what they're supposed to be doing.And, you know what, New Hampshire, I've kept that promise, because I still believe in you. I believe in the American people. And I need you to keep believing in me. I need you to hit some doors and make some phone calls and register your friends. Talk to your neighbors. Get on Facebook. Get on Twitter. Let's get to work. Let's finish what we started. Let's remind the world how a strong economy is built, and remind them why America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Boston! Thank you, Boston. Thank you. Please, everybody, have a seat. Oh, it is--[laughter].Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. Thank you. Well, it is good to be back in Boston. Good to be back in Massachusetts.I want to make some acknowledgments here. First of all, you've got one of the finest Governors in the country in Deval Patrick. You've got one of the finest mayors in the country in the Tom Menino. You've got an outstanding State auditor in Suzanne Bump.And I just want to thank Elizabeth for that introduction and let you know how lucky all of you are to have a chance to vote for her in the next election. Nobody fought harder for Wall Street reform--the reform that is now law and protecting consumers all across the country--than Elizabeth, reform that will end taxpayer bailouts, make sure folks aren't being taken advantage of by mortgage lenders and credit card companies. She has been a fierce advocate, since before I knew her, for the middle class. She has been advocating on core issues that matter to families her entire career. She is going to be an outstanding Senator from Massachusetts, and everybody here has got to turn out for her.I want to thank Miri Ben-Ari for her outstanding talent. We appreciate her appearing here today. I will not sing today, even though--[laughter]--when I'm in Symphony Hall, I'm tempted. I am tempted, but--[laughter]--can't do it. We have some serious business to attend to. [Laughter]I also want to acknowledge former Governor Michael Dukakis, who is here, and his lovely wife Kitty. And finally, ""Bos,"" I just want to say thank you for Youkilis.Audience members. Boo!The President. I'm just saying. He's going to have to change the color of his ""sox.""Audience members. Boo!The President. I didn't think I'd get any ""boos"" out of here, but--[laughter]--I guess I shouldn't have--I should not have brought up baseball. I understand. My mistake.Audience members. Boo!The President. My mistake. You've got to know your crowd. [Laughter]Audience member. We still love you! [Laughter]The President. Now, Boston, I'm here not just because I need your help--although I do. I'm here because the country needs your help.Now, in 2008, we came together not just to support a candidate--it wasn't just about me. When you support a guy named Barack Obama, you're not doing it because you thought it was a sure thing. [Laughter] The reason we came together in 2008 was because we had a shared vision about what's best in this country. We wanted to reclaim the basic bargain that made America what it is, that built the largest middle class in history, that built the most prosperous nation on Earth, that compact that binds us together as a people. That binds us together as citizens. We believed that in America, your success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth.We believed that if you worked hard, you should be able to find a good job; if you meet your responsibilities, you should be able to support your family and own a home, maybe start a business, give your kids opportunities you could not have imagined, no matter who you are, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter who you love, no matter what your last name is.It's that basic bargain that allowed Michelle and I to succeed. It's that basic bargain that took a young kid from the South Side of Chicago to become the Governor of the Commonwealth. It's that basic bargain that brought a lot of your parents or grandparents or great-grandparents to these shores from countries where that ideal didn't take root. And it was that basic bargain, that simple dream, that we understood had been slipping away for too many Americans.We'd gone through a decade in which surpluses were turned into deficits, in which two wars were fought on a credit card, in which a few people were doing very well but more and more people were having trouble just getting by, no matter how hard they worked, all of which culminated in the worst financial crisis of our lifetimes. And after that crisis, that dream seemed even more tattered, even more frayed.And so we went to work. And over the last 3 1/2 years, step by step, we've tried to rebuilt the foundations of that dream, making sure that we reformed our financial system so that reckless bets didn't always bring down our economy; making sure that people who are out there working hard don't have to worry about being bankrupt just because somebody in their family gets sick; making sure that young people are able to get the assistance they need to go to college and make something that approximates their dreams.And because of the incredible resilience and the incredible hard work, the toughness of the American people, we've begun to see progress: created over 4 million jobs over the last 3 1/2 years, 800,000 in the last few months alone. When some were saying let's go ahead and let Detroit go bankrupt, we bet on the American worker and American industries. And today, the U.S. auto industry is back on top and getting stronger.But what we also understand is, is that there are way too many people out there who are still struggling, too many people whose homes are underwater, too many small businesses that are still finding it hard to get financing and keep their doors open.And so the debate in this election is not whether we have more work to do. Of course, the economy is not where it needs to be. Of course, there are too many folks still struggling. Of course, we need to do better. These challenges were built up over years. They weren't created overnight; they weren't going to be solved overnight. But the debate in this election is how do we grow the economy faster? How do we create more jobs? Moving forward, how do we create more opportunity? How do we pay down our debt? How do we reclaim that basic bargain that makes America the greatest nation on Earth? How do we do it?And this is not just your usual run-of-the-mill Washington Beltway argument, this is the defining issue of our time. It is a make-or-break moment for our middle class, and the next President and the next Congress will be setting the course on the economy, on deficits, on taxes, not just for today, not just for tomorrow, but the next decade, the next two. This election will have an enormous impact on the country we live in today, but more importantly, it's going to have an impact on the country we pass on to our children.Now, what's holding us back from meeting these challenges--as much progress as we've made--what's holding us back still is not a lack of big ideas, it's not a lack of technical solutions. All the options are out there; everybody knows them. What's holding us back is a stalemate in Washington between two fundamentally different visions of which direction we should go.And this election is your chance to break that stalemate. This election is your chance to move this country forward. This is your choice. And let's be clear about what these choices are. Mr. Romney and his allies in Congress, they've got a very particular theory about how you grow the economy. They believe we should go back to the top-down economic policies of the last decade. You can sum them up fairly simply. They believe that if we eliminate regulations and cut taxes by trillions of dollars, that will free up the marketplace and will solve all our problems. That's the essence of their argument. They argue if we help corporations and wealthy investors maximize their profits by whatever means necessary--whether through layoffs or outsourcing or union-busting--that that will automatically translate into jobs and prosperity that benefit all of us. That's their theory.And that's not an exaggeration. Just last week, it was reported that Governor Romney's old firm owned companies that were pioneers--this is not my phrase, but how it was described in the report--""pioneers"" in the business of outsourcing American jobs to places like China and India. Yesterday his advisers tried to clear this up by telling us that there was a difference between ""outsourcing"" and ""offshoring."" [Laughter] Seriously. You can't make that up. [Laughter]And what Mr. Romney and his advisors don't seem to understand is this: If you're a worker whose job went overseas, you really don't need somebody explaining you the difference between outsourcing and offshoring. [Laughter] What you need is somebody who is going to wake up every day fighting to make sure that investments and jobs are happening here in Massachusetts and here in the United States of America. That's what you need.And let me be clear. We all believe in the free market. We all believe that risk takers and entrepreneurs need to be rewarded. It's that dynamism that built this country. But we also believe in shared prosperity. I want to close the outsourcing loophole in our Tax Code. I want to give tax breaks to companies who create jobs and manufacturing right here in the United States of America.And this particular commitment to outsourcing isn't just part of his record, it's part of an overall economic theory that Republicans in Congress want to implement if they win this election. It's been voted on in Congress. It's right there on Governor Romney's website. They promise to roll back all kinds of regulations on banks and polluters, insurance companies, oil companies. They don't want to just keep all of the Bush tax cuts in place, including tax cuts for folks who don't need them and weren't even asking for them; they want to add another $5 trillion in tax cuts on top of that, including a 25-percent tax cut for every millionaire in this country.Now, you may be wondering, how do they spend $5 trillion on new tax cuts and still keep a straight face when they say that their plan would reduce the deficit? This is a good question that you're asking yourselves. [Laughter] Boston has a lot of smart people in it. [Laughter] And I'm sure that we probably have some MIT grads here. See, math majors, they're thinking $5 trillion, all right, how does that add up?Well, they start by proposing a trillion dollars in cuts to things like education and training, medical research, clean energy. But that's only a trillion dollars, so that's not enough. So then, they propose eliminating health care for about 50 million Americans and converting Medicare into a voucher program. But that's still not enough. So then, they also have to effectively raise taxes on the middle class by taking away tax deductions for everything from health care, college, retirement, homeownership, which could cost families thousands of dollars.Now, this is on their websites; they voted on these plans. That's the entirety of their economic approach. That's it. There's nothing new there. We've tried this, by the way. When Mr. Romney tells us that he is some sort of financial wizard who can fix our economy, this is how he intends to do it.Now, if you're a person who thinks this plan sounds like a good idea, if we want to try the same policies that we just implemented in the last decade and did not work, those folks should vote for Mr. Romney. They should reelect the Republicans who have been running this Congress. And together, I promise you, this is the path they'll take America down. They're more than qualified to do it. [Laughter]But I believe their policies have been tested, and their policies have failed. And that's because in this country, prosperity hasn't come from the top down. It's come from a strong and growing middle class. It's come from people striving to get into that middle class. It's come from successful, thriving small businesses that turned into medium-sized businesses and large businesses. It comes from consumers who are seeing enough income and wage increases that they can afford to buy great products and services from businesses, and the entire economy grows.We do not need more top-down economics. We need a plan for better education and training so that our young people can take advantage of the marketplace; for energy independence and innovation and infrastructure. And we need a Tax Code that encourages companies to create jobs here in the United States and a Tax Code that asks the wealthiest Americans to help pay down our deficit. That's what we need. That's what we need. There's nothing radical about that vision. That's the vision that built this country. It was part of what used to be a bipartisan consensus. We don't expect government to solve all our problems. This notion that somehow there's been some heavy tilt to the left on the part of the Democratic Party, over the last 3 years, I cut taxes for the typical working family by $3,600. I cut taxes for small businesses 18 times, eliminated billions of dollars in regulations that didn't make sense and weren't making people healthier or safer.I don't believe we should be in the business of helping people who refuse to help themselves. I don't think government can solve every problem. But I do share this basic belief with our first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, who said that through government we should do together what we cannot do as well for ourselves: that there is a place for us to work on the common good, that there's a common good that we invest in together.That's how we built this country together. We built railroads and highways together. We built the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge together. We sent my grandfather's generation to college on the GI bill together. We invented--we invested in basic science that led to unimaginable discoveries. We did those things together. Because we understood it made us all better off. It gave us all opportunity because it created a platform where everybody could succeed.If you were willing to work hard, you could succeed, in part, because we had great schools and we had built great roads and we had a system in place that made sure that investors weren't cheated when they put money into the stock market and bank deposits were guaranteed and polluters didn't run wild. All those things made us, together, better off and allowed us to succeed as one people, as one Nation.That's the true lesson of our past. That is the right vision for our future. And, Boston, that is why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States, because I want to move that vision forward. [Applause] I want to move that vision forward.I'm running to make sure that every American has a chance to get the skills and training that today's jobs require. I want to recruit an army of new teachers. I want to pay them better. I want to hire more in areas like math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses are looking for right now. And I want to make higher education affordable for every American who's willing to work for it--not just by offering more loans and financial aid, but by bringing down the cost of college tuition--because this is no longer an economic luxury. Every young American needs the skills and the training to succeed in the 21st-century economy.Boston understands this. Massachusetts understands this. That's what we're fighting for. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President of the United States.I'm running so that we have a future where we control our own energy. That's good for our economy, it's good for our national security, it's good for our planet. We need to end subsidies for oil companies that are making plenty of money on their own and double down on a clean energy industry that's never been more promising: in wind power and solar power and biofuels and fuel-efficient cars.I'm running to make sure that the United States becomes--continues to be the best place on Earth for innovation and discovery.I'm proud that I kept the promise I made to you in 2008: We have ended the war in Iraq. We are transitioning out of Afghanistan.So I want to start doing some nation-building here at home. I want to take half the money we're no longer spending on war, use it to put people back to work rebuilding our roads, rebuilding our runways, rebuilding our ports, building wireless networks, building high-speed rail, investing more in research, investing more in science, all those ingredients that made us an economic superpower. That's the choice in this election.I'm running because we need to reduce our deficit, we need to manage our debt, and so I've put forward a plan: $4 trillion of deficit reduction that is balanced and responsible, that allows us to cut spending we can't afford, strengthens programs like Medicare for the long haul, and yes, reforms our Tax Code so that the wealthiest Americans pay a little bit more.And just as Mr. Romney's theories and the Republicans in Congress, their theories, have been tested, well, my theories have been tested as well, because that Tax Code that I described happened to be the Tax Code that was around when Bill Clinton was President, and we created 23 million new jobs, the biggest budget surplus in history. We created a whole lot of millionaires to boot. Businesses did just fine. And you know there are plenty of patriotic, successful Americans all across the country--I meet them every day--who'd be willing to make this contribution again because they understand there is such a thing as the common good. They understand that we're in this thing together.Mr. Romney disagrees with this vision. His allies in Congress disagree with this vision. Neither of them will endorse any policy that asks the wealthiest Americans to pay even a nickel more in taxes. That's the reason why we haven't reached an agreement to lower our deficits. That's the reason my jobs bill that independent economists say would put 1 million more people back to work has been voted down time and time again. It's the biggest source of gridlock in Washington for the last 3 years.Which brings me back to where I started. The only way we're going to break that gridlock is through you. Very rarely do you see such a stark choice in an election, with so much at stake. On every challenge we face, you have the final say about where do we go from here.You can decide whether we keep our brave men and women in Afghanistan indefinitely, as Mr. Romney proposes, or whether we stick to the timeline that I established that allows us to finally bring our troops home. That's your decision.You can decide whether we should restrict access to birth control or defund Planned Parenthood, or we can make a decision that in this country, women control their own health choices. That's a decision for you to make.You can decide whether ending taxpayer bailouts of Wall Street banks was the right thing to do; whether protecting consumers from unscrupulous practices--like Elizabeth fought for--whether that's the right thing to do; whether preventing insurance companies from discriminating against people who are sick is the right thing to do; or allowing over 3 million young people to stay on their parent's health insurance plan, whether that's the right thing to do; or bringing down prescription drugs costs for seniors was the right thing to do. I think it was the right thing to do. I know it was the right thing to do. And it's your choice whether we keep moving forward.You can decide whether we go back to the days where you could be kicked out of the United States military just because of who you are or who you love. I know where I stand on this.You can decide whether it's time to stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they were brought here as children of undocumented immigrants. I know where I stand on this. I know the choice I make.And you can decide whether we continue to have elections where multimillion-dollar donations, $10 million checks speak louder than the voices of ordinary citizens.Audience members. No!The President. This is going to be up to you. This election will be close. It will be close because there are a lot of folks who are still going through a tough time. And even if they don't buy what the other side is selling, it's hard [not hard]* in this environment sometimes for people to feel discouraged, for cynicism to creep in.And the other side, they feed on that. They will spend more money than we have ever seen in American history, and their message is very simple. They will just tell you that the economy is not where it needs to be, the economy is bad, and it's all my fault. [Laughter] They'll tell you, Obama can't fix it because he thinks Government is always the answer; or because he didn't make a lot of money in the private sector so he's in over his head; or because Obama thinks everything is--everybody is doing just fine. You'll just hear those messages over and over and over again. Scary voices in the ads. [Laughter] Flashing at you. [Laughter] That's what Mr. Romney will say. That's what the Republicans in Congress will say.And I understand their approach. I mean, it's a plausible plan to win an election. But it's not a plan to create jobs. It's not a plan to grow the economy. It's not a plan to give all the people I meet around the country who are working so hard and struggling every day, it's not a plan to give them a handle on achieving their dreams. It's not a plan to rebuild our middle class.And ultimately, that's what we have to have. We've got to have a plan that goes back to that basic bargain that we were fighting for in 2008, that basic compact between citizens that says, I've got a stake in your success. And that kid over in Dorchester who didn't have all the opportunities, or in South Boston who didn't have all the chances that I had, you know what, I've got a stake in his success. I think I'll be better off, my kids will be better off, if that kid gets an education.That sense that you know what, I don't put on a hard hat every day when I go to work, but if I'm seeing the skyline rising and those construction workers out there building, you know somehow that's going to make my life better. It's going to help secure the future of my kids and my grandkids.And if I see an elderly couple strolling through the park and they're holding hands and I know that they've got the security and dignity of a retirement that eases their anxieties, yes, that makes me feel better about my country. It's good for my life.We are not there yet. This is hard work. It's always been hard. Progress in this country has always been hard. It's never come easy. There have been episodes, moments in our history where it looked easy, but it always involved struggle. And what we started in 2008, I never promised you it was going to be easy. I told you then I wasn't a perfect man and I wouldn't be a perfect President. But what I told you was also that I promised you that every single day, I would tell you what I thought, I would tell you where I stood, and I'd wake up in the morning and I'd go to bed at night thinking about how I could make your lives better. I would fight for you as hard as I could.And I've kept that promise. I've kept that promise, Boston. I believe in you. And if you believe in me, and if you agree with me about how we've got to give everybody a fair shot and we want everybody to do their fair share and we want everybody to play by the same rules, then I need you to stand with me for a second term as President.I need you to knock on doors with me. I need you to make phone calls with me. I want all of you to understand that if you share this belief--and I believe a vast majority of the American people do--and in fact, I think there are Republicans out there who do. [Laughter] They just can't admit it right now. [Laughter] I'll work with anyone of any party who believes that we are in this together and believes that we will rise and fall as one Nation, as one people. That's what we're fighting for right now.Don't let anybody tell you we don't have the capacity to solve our challenges. We do. We've got the opportunities. We are Americans, and we've never shied away from these kinds of fights. But we've got to fix our politics, and you guys are the ones who are going to help fix it.So I hope you're ready. I hope you're ready. I hope you're still fired up. And if anybody asks you what this campaign is about, you tell them it's still about hope, and it is still about change, and we're going to finish what we started in 2008. We're going to move this country forward and remind the world why America is the greatest nation on Earth.Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you. You don't need to stand up again. No, you already did that. Come on, come on. Thank you, everybody. Thank you so much.Let me, first of all, thank Doug and Judi and George and Lizbeth. What a spectacular evening. You guys could not be more gracious. And if this is the first time you've done this, you're actually quite good at this. [Laughter] So just want to let you know that you're doing fine. [Laughter] Really.A couple other people who are here: As was mentioned, Rob Barber has been an extraordinary friend for many, many years, and so we thank him for all of his support. We've also got somebody who I met when I was still running for the U.S. Senate and has been a wonderful friend all these years, your treasurer, Steve Grossman, is here. Where is Steve? There he is.And finally, let me just say that somebody who I genuinely consider a brother--I don't mean that in the vernacular. [Laughter] I mean somebody who--when I think about people who I admire, I care about, who I just think is good people and who articulates a vision of what this country should be as well as anybody in this country, it's your Governor, Deval Patrick. I love the guy. Thank you, Deval Patrick.So some of you were at Symphony Hall, and I had a chance to give a long speech. And what I'd like to do tonight--take advantage of the fact that we have an intimate setting--I'm not going to give a long speech at the front end. What I'd rather do is have a conversation, answer your questions, take some comments.But let me just say at the top that many of you were involved in the election in 2008, and in some ways, when I talk to my political team about--and reminisce about--2008, it was like lightening in a bottle. It captured a spirit and an energy and an electricity that was spectacular. And I couldn't be prouder of the campaign we ran in 2008.But, in some ways, this election is more important than 2008. In some ways, the stakes are higher. Because back in 2008, there was some overlap between Democrats and Republicans on some important issues. The nominee from the other party believed in climate change, believed in campaign finance reform, believed in immigration reform. And what we've seen in the face of probably the worst financial crisis and economic crisis of our lifetimes is that the Republican Party has moved in a fundamentally different direction, so that on every issue we have fundamental choices that are at stake that will determine not just how we do tomorrow or the next day, but for the next 10 years or the next 20 years.And I've said this before, and I believe it: This is a make-or-break moment for who we are as a country and the values that we live by. And I think it's a make-or-break moment for the middle class in this country or everybody who is aspiring to get into the middle class.Obviously, we're still recovering from the financial crisis and the economic crisis, and there are a lot of people who are still out of work and a lot of homes that are still underwater and a lot of businesses that are still struggling. But for a decade before that crisis, what we had seen was that the basic bargain that built this country, that allowed so many of us to be successful--the notion that if you work hard, no matter who you are, where you come from, what you look like, who you love, you can make it; that if you're responsible and you look after your family and you apply yourself, you can support a family and have a home and send your kids to college so they can do better than you ever imagined--that basic compact had been eroding, so that job growth had been more sluggish in the previous decade than any time in the previous 50 years, and a few people were doing extraordinarily well, but for more and more people it was a struggle just to keep up.And it was papered over for a while through debt and home equity loans and credit cards, but that was a house of cards that all came tumbling down. And so even as we work on the immediate task of putting people back to work and getting the economy growing faster, we've got this underlying challenge that we have to meet. And that is, how do we get back to an economy that is built to last and where everybody has got a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules?And in answering that question, we've got two fundamentally different visions: one vision that essentially can be summed up as get rid of all regulations and cut taxes for another $5 trillion, a top-down approach to economic growth; and I've got a different vision that says we are entrepreneurs and rugged individualists and we don't expect to help people who don't want to help themselves, but we also believe in a common good.And we believe in things like a public education system and colleges and universities that give everybody a chance to succeed. And we believe in investing in science and technology so that these extraordinary discoveries can then be used to create entire industries and provide opportunity for more and more people.And we believe in creating a great infrastructure so businesses can move people and products and services seamlessly throughout our global economy. And we believe in a Tax Code that is fair and balanced, in which success is rewarded, but in which we also are paying for those investments that allow us to pass on a great country to the next generation.And we believe in an energy program that taps into American energy, but also makes sure that we're taking care of our environment and we're not subject to the whims of what happens in some country in the Middle East at any given moment.And we believe in American manufacturing, not because manufacturing is going to be as central to today's economy as it was back in the 1950s, but when we make things and produce things and sell things around the world, there is a basic strength to our economy that ripples everywhere and gives more and more the chance to get ahead, just as the auto industry did for two or three generations, which is exactly why we had to intercede to make sure that they succeeded.So, on each of these issues about the economy, there are profound, fundamental differences. And we had a stalemate in Washington now for 3 years. And you, the American voter, is going to have to break that stalemate. Now, that's before we start getting into foreign policy, where my opponent thinks that it is tragic that I ended the war in Iraq the way I did or that resists setting a timeline for getting out of Afghanistan.That doesn't capture the differences we have on things like women's health, where my opponent wants to end funding for Planned Parenthood or restrict access to birth control.It doesn't capture the differences we have on something like ""don't ask, don't tell."" I think if you love this country, it shouldn't matter who you love, you should be able to serve.The Supreme Court, immigration reform, environmental protection--you name it, there's a fundamental choice involved.So this is going to be a close election. Not because people are particularly persuaded by the argument the other side is making; it's the same old argument they've been making for the last 30, 40 years. It's going to be close because people are scared and frustrated and there are a lot of folks who are still out of work and the economy is still tough. And the other side is spending more money than we've ever seen before, trying to tap into those anxieties. They're betting they don't have to offer much; they just say things aren't good and it's Obama's fault.The good news is that as I've traveled around the country over the last several years, what I've realized is, that core decency and strength and common sense of the American people, it wins out in the end. When folks are mobilized and activated, and when we're out there speaking truth, over time it breaks through. It wins out.But it doesn't happen automatically. It happens because of effort. It happens because of determination. And although it is true that I'm a little grayer now than I was when I met some of you the first time--[laughter]--my determination is undiminished. I am as fired up as I ever was. And I hope you're ready to go.Thanks. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Atlanta! Hello, hello! Thank you so much. It is good to see everybody here, back in Atlanta.Couple of people I want to acknowledge. First of all, your outstanding mayor, Mr. Kasim Reed, is in the house. Former Governor Roy Barnes is in the house. I want to thank all the members of the host committee who made this such an extraordinary event. And then I've got to give a special shout-out to one of my favorite people. He's a little bit of a troublemaker--[laughter]--he's a little bit irascible. [Laughter] But he is a man of God, and he's a man of the people, and he has been a great friend to me for a very long time. So give it up for Reverend Joseph Lowery. Love that man.So, Atlanta, I am here not just because I need your help--although I do--but I'm here because your country needs your help.Back in 2008, we came together because we believed in a basic bargain that built this country, the basic idea that in America, your life is not determined by the circumstances of your birth; the idea that here in America, if you are willing to work hard, then you can find a job that pays a living wage, that you can care for your family, that you can have a home, that you can send your kids to college and allow them to have experiences and opportunities you didn't even dream of, that you can retire with dignity and respect. That basic American idea that if you take responsibility for your own life, that you can go as far as your dreams can take you and it doesn't matter what you look like, where you come from, what your last name is, who you love. That basic American idea that you can make it if you try.And for almost a decade, we had seen that dream that built the largest middle class in history and the most successful economy in history, we had seen that dream slipping away. We had watched surpluses turned into deficits. We had seen two wars fought on a credit card. We had seen a few people at the top do really, really well while more and more folks were struggling to get by, dealing with higher costs of health care, higher costs of education, but weren't seeing higher salaries or higher incomes. And this was all before the worst financial crisis in our lifetimes struck and the worst economic crisis in our lifetimes hit.And so over the last 3 1/2 years, that journey that we began, it's been tough sometimes. We've had a steep mountain to climb. But slowly and surely, the American people have proved, once again, that they are tougher than tough times. There were folks who said, let's let Detroit go bankrupt. We said, let's invest in American workers and American businesses, and now the American auto industry is back on top.All across the country, folks who lost their jobs, they went back to school, retrained for the industries of the future. All across the country, small businesses hung on, no matter how tough it was; kept folks on payroll, even if the owner sometimes couldn't take a salary, because they understood that families were depending on them. And over time, what we've seen is steady progress and steady movement. More than 4 million jobs created over the last 27 months, more than 800,000 created just in the last few months alone.But of course, we understand we had a big hole that was created by that crisis. And it's going to take more than just a few months or a few years to dig our way out of that hole, because this is a challenge that's existed for over a decade now. And we recognize there's still too many of our friends who don't have work and too many of our family members whose homes are underwater, too many folks struggling. We've got more work to do. We understand we've got so much more work to do.And the question is not whether we need to put more folks back to work or whether we need to see the economy growing faster or whether we need to bring down our debt, the question is how do we do it. The question is how do we do it.And in this election, all of you have the opportunity to choose between two fundamentally different visions of how you grow America, two fundamentally different visions about who we are as a people and what makes this Nation great. On one side you've got Mr. Romney and his allies in Congress----Audience members. Boo!The President. Mr. Romney is a patriotic American. He's got a beautiful family. He's been very successful in his life. [Laughter] But--no, he has. But his basic vision is one in which if wealthy investors like him and folks at the very top are freed up from any kind of regulations, if they are maximizing their profits, even if it means polluting more or offshoring jobs or avoiding taxes or busting unions--whatever the strategies--if they're doing well, then everybody else is automatically doing well. That's their view.And that's basically their economic plan. I'm not making this up. It's on the--Mr. Romney's website. Members of Congress have put forward this plan. They voted for this plan. Their basic idea is we're going to eliminate regulations on everything, we are going to provide a $5 trillion tax cut on top of the Bush tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans, and we're just going to let the market take care of the rest. And the presumption is that everybody here, everybody around the country, will share in this newfound prosperity.Now, I don't doubt that they will execute this plan if they get elected. Here is the problem: We tried it. We tried it very recently, and it didn't work. That kind of top-down economics has never worked. That's not how this country was built. It's good for a few, but it doesn't create that broad-based middle class and folks having ladders to get into the middle class that made this country great.And so we've got an alternative vision, because I believe we're all in it together. I've got a vision that says the way we're going to grow our economy and put people back to work is to make sure every child in America has the best education possible. I've got a vision that says the way we grow our economy is by making sure that we're bringing manufacturing back to the United States. I've got a vision that says the way we build our economy is to rebuild America--our roads, our bridges, our runways, our ports, our airports--putting people back to work. I've got a vision that says we'll grow our economy if we control our own energy sources so we're not dependent on what happens in the Middle East. And that's why we got to double down on clean energy: wind power and solar power. And I've got a vision that says we grow best when our Tax Code makes sure that the wealthiest Americans are paying a little bit more in order to bring down our debt.It's the basic idea that everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody plays by the same set of rules. That's my vision for America. And just like their vision has been tested, my vision's been tested as well. When you look at the history of this country, the way we emerged as an economic superpower was doing it together.My grandfather's generation was educated on the GI bill. We did that together. We made a common investment in the common good. The Hoover Dam, the Golden Gate Bridge, the Interstate Highway System--we did those things together, because we understood everybody would be more successful if we were making those common investments that gave each of us the capacity to do well.Abraham Lincoln, the first Republican President, said it pretty well. He said, we should do for ourselves what we do best for ourselves, but we should also do together those things that we do better together. And so we made investments in science and technology, inventing the products that led to the Internet and GPS and Google and amazing medical breakthroughs. We did that because together, through our Government, we made these investments in basic research.We did all these things throughout our history not because they were good for one particular person, not because they were good for one particular group, but because they were good for all of us. Because we understood we rise and fall as one people, as one Nation.That's my vision for America. That's what I've been fighting for, for the last 3 1/2 years. That's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America.Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. So let me break this down just a little bit more specifically, just because I want everybody to understand. Let's look for a moment at Mr. Romney's--the specifics of his plan. I already indicated to you he wants to roll back regulations for polluters and for insurance companies and for the big banks, wants to get rid of the Wall Street reform that we did to make sure that we don't have any more taxpayer bailouts. All right, so that's one big part of his plan. Then he's got this plan to cut taxes by another $5 trillion. All right? So what this would mean would be the average millionaire would see their taxes go down by 25 percent.Now, you may be wondering, how is it that he can talk about cutting taxes by $5 trillion and, at the same time, say he's going to reduce our deficit. Because they always talk about the deficit and how terrible it is and we've got to get control of the deficit and the debt, and this--we can't pass this on to the next generation. All right, so you're going to cut $5 trillion, giving folks like me or Mr. Romney a tax break. How do the numbers work?Well, what Mr. Romney says, first of all, is we'll cut a trillion dollars out of that portion of the Federal budget that finances everything from education to Head Start to health care to environmental protection to consumer protection--all the things we think of--food safety, you name it. A trillion dollars gets cut out of that, which means that a lot of people suddenly will not have the protections they were counting on. A lot of folks around the country won't be getting services that we think are part of what makes America great.All right? But that's only $1 trillion, so that doesn't get you everywhere you need to go. So then, the next step would be to have tens of millions of people no longer have health insurance.Audience members. No!The President. He'd roll back the Affordable Care Act, and he'd block-grant Medicaid in such a way where vulnerable people all across the country, folks who may be disabled, folks--seniors who are relying on those services--that would be eliminated.But that doesn't pay for $5 trillion. That's not enough. So then, what they'd have to do is eliminate a whole bunch of deductions that middle class families count on to keep their taxes low. And so what this adds up to is essentially you--your family, your friends, middle class people all across the country--would end up seeing higher taxes to pay for tax cuts for Mr. Romney and me.Audience member. It ain't right.The President. It ain't right. [Laughter]It--[applause]--now, that's not a recipe for economic growth. That's not going to make us stronger. That's not going to make our young people more educated. It's not going to make us more competitive in this global economy.So what I've said is, no, here is what we need to do. We need to invest more in education. I want to hire more teachers, especially in math and science. I want 2 million more people to have access to community colleges to get the skills and the training they need to get jobs from local businesses right now. I want to make college more affordable so young people don't have as much debt when they graduate. That's my vision for how we're going to move forward.I want to stop giving subsidies to oil companies that have never been more successful, never made more profits. I want to take that money and give subsidies to clean energy, to the energy of the future that's never been more promising--fuel-efficient cars and solar power and wind power, biodiesel--putting folks back to work creating homegrown energy, so we're less dependent on foreign oil.I want to invest in science and technology all across the country, because that's always been what's maintained our cutting edge.And then, as you know, I promised in 2008 I would end the war in Iraq. We ended it. We're phasing down the war in Afghanistan. And I want to take half of those savings, pay down the deficit, and take the other half and let's start doing some nation-building right here at home, putting folks back to work rebuilding our infrastructure all across the country.I want to change our Tax Code, because I'm tired of seeing us give tax breaks to companies that ship jobs overseas. I want to give tax breaks to companies that are investing right here in Georgia, right here in Atlanta, right here in the United States of America.There was an article the other day in the Washington Post about how Mr. Romney's former firm--this is what gave him all this amazing success--was a ""pioneer"" in offshoring jobs to China and India. And when they were asked about it, some of his advisers explained, no, there's a difference between offshoring and outsourcing. [Laughter] I'm not kidding, that's what they said. Those workers who lost their jobs, they didn't understand the difference.But the point is, we don't need somebody who's a pioneer in offshoring or outsourcing. We need a President in the White House who's going to, every single day, be fighting to bring jobs back to the United States, do some insourcing, put folks back to work here.And on this Tax Code, as I said, I do not think that a $250,000 tax break for me or Mr. Romney--he'd get a little more, he's got more--[Laughter]--more than I do--I don't think that's more important than us hiring outstanding teachers. I don't think that's more important than us sending broadband lines into rural areas of Georgia and all across the country so that folks have access to the Internet. I don't think that's going to help our economy grow more than us investing in cures for Alzheimer's or cancer.I want to bring down the deficit in a responsible, balanced way. I've already put forward a plan--$4 trillion in deficit reduction--spending cuts for things that we don't need, strengthen Medicare and our health care system so that we get a better bang for our buck, and asking the wealthiest to pay a little bit more. And you know what, when you talk to folks around the country, successful Americans, they want to do a little more. If it's done right, they want to contribute to making America stronger.Now, that vision--the good news is, is when you ask people, item by item, between these two visions, the American people have a sense of what makes sense. They prefer our vision. But this is still going to be a close election because the economy is still tough and folks are still frustrated. And what that means is that you're going to have more money spent in this election than ever before by the other side on negative ads. And their message will be simple. They'll say, the economy's bad and it's Obama's fault. [Laughter] They suffer a little bit of amnesia so they don't remember all the stuff that happened before I was sworn into office, but that's going to be their message.And because times are tough, and because they're spending these ungodly sums, it's going to be close. But here's the thing that all of you taught me from 2008: When the American people decide that something is important, when ordinary citizens come together and they talk to their neighbors, they talk to their friends, they talk to their coworkers, they start getting organized, they knock on doors, they make phone calls, amazing things happen. Change happens.No matter how much money is spent on the other side, when people are engaged and involved and they understand that our core values and who we are and what we're giving to the next generation is at stake, the American people fight for what's right.And the American people understand that we're not going to make progress by going backwards. We need to go forwards. They understand we don't need to refight this battle over health care. It's the right thing to do that we've got 3 million young people who are on their parents' health insurance plans that didn't have it before. It's the right thing to do to give seniors discounts on their prescription drugs. It's the right thing to do to give 30 million Americans health insurance that didn't have it before.They want to go forward. They understand it's the right thing to do to make sure that we don't have to bail out Wall Street again, that we've got some basic regulations to protect our consumers from unscrupulous lenders or mortgage brokers. They understand that. They don't want to go backwards.They don't want to go back to the days when women had a tough time getting access to birth control or Planned Parenthood's getting defunded. They want women to have control over their own health care choices. They don't want to go backwards.They don't want to go back to the days when you might not be able to fight for the country you love just because of who you love. They don't want ""don't ask, don't tell"" reinstated. They don't want to go backwards to a day when young people who, as children, were brought to the United States and were raised with our kids and went to school with our kids--are our kids, are Americans through and through in everything except the papers--that somehow they should be sent away instead of contributing to the United States of America. They don't want to go back to that.So I have faith in the American people. I know when we started this journey back in 2008, I didn't have all this gray hair. [Laughter]Audience member. It looks good! It looks good!The President. But from traveling all across the country, my faith, my conviction in the strength and resilience and the goodness and decency of the American people, it is restored every single day. I have so much confidence that, even when we occasionally take the wrong turn, eventually, the road straightens out. We follow that right path. I truly believe this is a blessed country.And so we'll see some cynicism and negativism and foolishness during the course of this campaign. [Laughter] This campaign will have its ups, and it will have its downs. But I remind you of what I said in 2008: I'm not a perfect man, and I'll never be a perfect President. But I told you I'd always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you what I believed, and most importantly, I told you I'd wake up every single day and fight as hard as I knew how for you, that I'd fight as hard as I knew how for all those folks who are doing the right thing out there, all those people who kept the faith with this country. And you know what, I've kept that promise. I have kept that promise.I believe in you. I hope you still believe in me. I hope you're ready to stand. I hope you're ready to fight. I hope you're ready to go out there and knock on some doors and make some phone calls, talk to your friends and talk to your neighbors and get them to the polls. And if you do, we will finish what we started in 2008. And we will rebuild this economy and rebuild our middle class. And we will remind the world just why it is that we are the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Miami! Thank you. It is good to be back in Miami.Now, let me just, first of all, recognize a few people who are here. First of all, wasn't Maytee wonderful? Give her a big round of applause. She is an example of what this campaign is all about. And I could not be prouder to have folks like her involved every single day, out there in the grassroots, making a difference. So all of you who are out there volunteering, knocking on doors, making phone calls, I love you and I'm grateful to you.A couple of other people I want to acknowledge: First of all, outstanding Congresswoman and DNC Chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz is in the house. We love Debbie. My Florida finance chair, Kirk Wagar, is here. Abigail and F.J. Pollak did a great job--thank you. I want to thank Enrique Santos for emceeing. Somebody who has become just a great friend and an extraordinary person and also sings and dances pretty good, Marc Anthony.Finally, it would be incomplete if I did not congratulate the city of Miami for having the world champion Miami Heats here in town. You guys earned it. And since one of my favorite people is Alonzo Mourning, who's here, and Tracy Mourning, I just want to give them a special shout-out. Alonzo looks like he can still play. [Laughter] Hasn't aged a bit--unbelievable. I'm getting all gray, and he just looks the same. [Laughter] Except he doesn't have that flattop. [Laughter]Now, Miami, I'm here not just because I need your help--although I do, and I will get to that.Audience member. I love you!The President. I love you back.But I'm mainly here because your country needs your help.Back in 2008, we came together to reclaim the basic bargain that built this country, the essence of America, what created the largest middle class and the most prosperous economy on Earth. We came together because we believed that in America, your success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth. If you're willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job. If you're willing to meet your responsibilities, you should be able to own a home, maybe start a business, give your children a chance to do even better than you did, no matter who you are, no matter what you look like, no matter where you came from, no matter what your last name, no matter who you love. That is the promise of America.And we came together in 2008 because we felt that basic bargain, that simple dream was slipping away for too many people, and it had been for a decade. We'd gone through a decade where manufacturing was leaving our shores and a surplus had turned to a deficit; a few folks were doing really well but more and more people were struggling to get by, no matter how hard they worked. And the costs of health care and college were going up and up and up; people were borrowing with credit cards and home equity loans to try to maintain their standard of living, but it just got harder and harder. And all this culminated in the worst economic crisis that we've seen in our lifetimes. And because of that crisis, that dream felt like it was even farther away.Now, the good news is the American people are tougher than tough times. And over the last 3 1/2 years we've fought back. And when some said let's let Detroit go bankrupt, we believed in the American worker and we believed in American manufacturing, and now Detroit is back on top, and we are selling cars all over the world. People who lost their jobs went back and got retrained--maybe a 50-year-old sitting back in a classroom in a community college and suddenly finding an entire new career opening up to him. Small businesses, through the SBA, were able to get some financing and keep their doors open and keep their payrolls and make sure that the families who depended on that business were still able to succeed.Now, we've still got a long way to go. We lost 9 million jobs in that recession. And although we've created more than 4 million since I've taken office and 800,000 in the last few months alone, this has been a steep climb. And we understand from our friends and our neighbors, in our own lives, how much more work we have to do. Too many folks out there still without a job; too many people here in Florida still seeing their homes underwater. So we understand how much work we have left.But the debate in this election is not whether we need to do better. Everybody understands the economy is not where it needs to be. A lot of folks are still struggling; we've got to do better. The debate in this election, though, is about how do we do better. How do we grow our economy faster? How do we create more good jobs? How do we pay down our debt? How do we reclaim that basic bargain and rebuild our middle class that has made us the greatest nation on Earth? That's the question in this election. That's the choice in this election.And this is not a manufactured debate. This is not one of those Washington Beltway insider arguments that don't mean anything. This is the defining issue of our time. It's a make-or-break moment for the middle class, but also for all those folks who still aspire to the middle class, who are still trying to climb into a life of security for their families. The next President, the next Congress, is going to face a set of decisions on the economy and on deficits and on taxes that will have an enormous impact not just on our country today, but on the country that we pass on to the next generation.And understand that what's holding us back from meeting these challenges is not the lack of technical solutions; it's not the lack of big ideas. What's holding us back right now is we've got a stalemate in Washington. We've got a stalemate between two fundamentally different views, two fundamentally different visions of where this country should go.And you know who's going to break that stalemate? You. You're going to break that stalemate. This election is your chance to move this country forward and make sure it does not go backwards.So let me just break down this choice, because I want everybody to be very clear about it. Governor Romney and his allies believe that we should go back to the top-down economics of the last decade.Audience members. No!The President. They believe that if we eliminate regulations and we cut taxes by trillions of dollars, we just leave the market alone, that everybody will prosper. They argue that if we help corporations and wealthy investors maximize their profits by whatever means necessary--whether it means layoffs or outsourcing or union-busting or whatever means are available--that that will automatically translate into jobs and prosperity that benefit everybody. Last week it was reported Governor Romney's old firm owned companies that, according to this article, were pioneers in the business of outsourcing American jobs to places like China and India. And yesterday his advisers were asked about this, and they tried to clear it up by explaining that there's actually a difference between outsourcing and offshoring. [Laughter] I'm not making that up. You can't make something like that up. [Laughter]Now, if you're a worker whose job just went overseas, you really aren't looking for somebody to explain to you the difference between offshoring and outsourcing. What you need is somebody who's going to wake up every single day fighting for your job, fighting for American jobs. That's what you want.You want somebody who will close the outsourcing loopholes in our Tax Code. You want somebody who will give tax breaks to companies that create jobs in manufacturing here in the United States, not ship them overseas.And the reason this is relevant is because this is part of their overall economic vision, an overall economic plan that he and the Republicans in Congress share and they will implement if they are elected. And it's there for all to see it; they've put it on the table. It's been voted on in Congress. It's right on Governor Romney's website. They're going to roll back all kinds of regulations on banks and polluters and insurance companies and oil companies. That's part one of the plan.Part two of the plan is not only to keep all the Bush tax cuts in place, including for the wealthiest Americans, but also add another $5 trillion in tax cuts on top of that, which includes a 25-percent tax cut for every millionaire in the country.Audience members. Boo!The President. Now, you may be wondering--because I can tell this is a smart crowd--[laughter]--how do they spend $5 trillion on new tax cuts and then claim that their plan would reduce the deficit? That's a good question.They start by proposing a trillion dollars in cuts to things like education and training and medical research and clean energy-- $1 trillion out of that part of the budget that is helping to make us more competitive. But that's not enough. They also proposed eliminating health care for about 50 million Americans and turning Medicare into a voucher program.But that's still not enough. It still doesn't get you to 5 trillion. So they'll also then have to eliminate deductions, which effectively will raise taxes on the middle class by taking away tax benefits for everything from health care, college, retirement, homeownership. So that could cost middle class families thousands of dollars.That's their entire economic plan. That's it. So, when Mr. Romney says he's some financial wizard who can fix our economy, that's exactly how he intends to do it.Now, there are folks out there who think this plan sounds like a good idea. They want to give the policies of the last decade another try. And if so, they should vote for Mr. Romney. They should reelect the Republicans who have been running Congress. Together, they will take America down this path. They are more than qualified to do it. They will do it. Take them at their word, they will do it. [Laughter]But you and I remember how it worked out the last time we tried this philosophy. These policies have been tested, and they have failed. And the reason is because there's another vision out there for America, the one I believe in, the one you believe in. A vision that says prosperity never comes from the top down; it comes from a strong and growing middle class and all those strivers who are fighting to get into the middle class and successful, thriving small businesses that become medium-sized businesses and big businesses.We don't need more top-down economics. We need a plan for better education and training and energy independence and innovation and new infrastructure, and we need a Tax Code that encourages companies to keep jobs here in the United States and asks wealthy Americans to help pay down our deficit. That's what we need. That's what we're fighting for. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America. Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!The President. Listen, listen. Miami, we do not expect Government to solve all our problems. This notion that somehow all we believe in are Government solutions, look at the record. Over the last 3 years, I cut taxes for the typical working family by $3,600. Cut taxes for small businesses 18 times. Eliminated billions of dollars of regulations that don't make sense, aren't making people safer or healthier. I don't believe we should be in the business of helping people who refuse to help themselves. I believe in individual responsibility.I believe no education program is going to be better than parents doing their job at making sure that kids are instilled with a love of learning. But I do share the belief of our first Republican President, a guy named Abraham Lincoln, that through our Government we should do together what we can't do as well for ourselves.The belief that we are a team, that's how we built this country--together. We built railroads and highways, the Hoover Dam, the Golden Gate Bridge, the Interstate Highway System, the transcontinental rail. We built those things together. We sent my grandfather's generation to college on the GI bill. We did that together. We made investments in sending a man to the Moon and helping to create the Internet. We did those things together.We did those things because there is such a thing as a common good. There's the understanding that these investments we make, make us all richer. They give us all opportunity. We don't do it just for one person or for one group. We understand that we move forward as one Nation and as one people. That's the lesson of our past. That's the right vision for our future. That's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States. I believe in that vision. I believe in it.I'm running to make sure that every American, every young person has a chance to get the skills and training that today's jobs require. And that's why we want to recruit an army of new teachers and pay them better and hire them in areas like math and science and give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges to upgrade their skills to get the jobs that local businesses are looking for right now.That's why we want to make higher education affordable for every young person who's willing to work for it, not just by offering loans and grants, but also by getting schools to hold down their college tuition. It's the right thing to do. That's the choice in this election, and that's why I'm running for President.I want us to be in control of our own energy future. That's good for our economy, our security. It's good for our planet. That's why we need to end Government subsidies for oil companies that are already making a lot of money. Let's double down on investments in clean energy, in solar and wind and biodiesel and fuel-efficient cars. That will be good for all of us.I want to make sure that America continues to be the best place for innovation and discovery. It's why we need to continue investing in research and development. And after a decade of war, it's time for us to start doing some nation-building here at home.I ended the war in Iraq, as I promised. We are winding down the war in Afghanistan. I want to take half the money we're no longer spending on war and put it to use putting people back to work rebuilding our roads and our runways and our ports and our wireless networks. That's the choice in this election.The other side will say, well, we can't afford to do all that; deficits, debt, that's our problem. Well, I put forward a plan that will reduce our deficit by $4 trillion in a way that's balanced and responsible, a detailed plan that cuts spending we can't afford--and there's waste in Government programs that don't work--that also strengthens programs like Medicare for the long haul and reforms our Tax Code so that the wealthiest Americans pay a little more.And by the way, that approach--just like their approach has been tested, our approach has been tested, because that formula of a Tax Code that is balanced and fair is what produced those surpluses under Bill Clinton. It's what got our economy creating 23 million new jobs. It's what got the engines of our economy moving. And by the way, it was good for business. We created a lot of millionaires and a lot of billionaires during those times, because they had a lot of customers for their services and their products. And there are a lot of patriotic, successful Americans--including here tonight--who would be willing to do a little bit more for their country because they understand the concept of a common good. They understand we're in it together.Now, Governor Romney disagrees with my vision. That's what democracy's all about: We choose. His allies in Congress disagree with my vision. They've got a different approach. Neither of them will endorse any policy that asks folks like me or Marc Anthony--[laughter]--to pay even a nickel more in taxes. That's the reason we haven't reached an agreement on our deficit. It's the reason my jobs bill that independent economists say would put an additional million people back to work has been voted down time and time again. It's the biggest source of gridlock in Washington these last 3 years.And the folks who can break this stalemate are you. You can decide. On every challenge we face, you get the final say. That's how our democracy works. You can decide. You can decide whether we decide to keep our brave men and women in Afghanistan indefinitely, as Mr. Romney wants to do, or whether we stick to the timeline that I set that will finally bring our troops home. That will be your decision.You can decide whether or not we go back to restricting access to birth control or defunding Planned Parenthood, or whether you believe that women in America should control their own health choices. That will be your decision.You can decide whether we should roll back Wall Street regulations that we put in place to prevent taxpayer bailouts and to protect consumers. You can decide whether it makes sense, as Mr. Romney wants to do, to roll back the reforms that we put in place that prevent insurance companies from discriminating against people who are sick.I believe it's the right thing to do. I believe health reform was the right thing to do. I believe it was right to make sure that over 3 million young people can stay on their parent's health insurance plan. I believe it was right to provide more discounts for seniors on their prescription drugs. I believe it was right to make sure that everybody in this country gets decent health care and is not bankrupt when they get sick. That's what I believe. But it's up to you. You decide.It's your decision whether we go back to the days when you could be kicked out of the U.S. military just because of who you are and who you love. I believe ending ""don't ask, don't tell"" was the right thing to do.You can decide whether or not it makes sense to stop denying the opportunity of responsible young people: to allow them to stay here and prosper here and get educated here, just because they're the children of undocumented immigrants. They are Americans through and through, except for their papers. I believe it was the right thing to do. But ultimately, it's up to you.And you know what, you can also decide whether we're going to continue to have elections decided by multimillion-dollar donations instead of the voices of ordinary citizens.Audience members. Boo!The President. This is going to be a close election. It's going to be close because there are a lot of folks still struggling out there. But it's also going to be close because the other side will spend more money than at any time in United States history on negative ads that have a very simple message. They'll say the economy's bad and it's all my fault. [Laughter] That will be their message. I mean, they'll have variations to the same theme. They'll say, well, he can't fix it because he thinks Government's always the answer, or he can't fix it because he didn't make a lot of money in the private sector, or he's in over his head, or he thinks everybody's doing just fine.That's what the scary voices in the ads will be saying. That's what Mitt Romney will say. That's what the Republicans in Congress will say. And since you are in a battleground State, you will hear this a lot. And I understand it's a theory to win an election. It's sure not a plan to create jobs. It's not a plan to grow our economy. It's not a plan to restore the American Dream.And so ultimately, the question for all of you is how much are you willing to fight for this? If you agree with me and if you believe this economy grows best when everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules, if you believe in the common good, if you believe we're a team, if you believe we do best when we work together, then I'm going to need you. And I'm going to need you to go out there and work hard.And by the way, this is not a Democratic idea or a Republican idea. You vote for anybody--Republican, Democrat, Independent--anybody who shares these values and shares this vision, because there was a time when Republicans would express these same values and these same visions. And I think there are a lot of Republicans and Independents out there who recognize that we can't go back to you're-on-your-own economics, that don't believe we should just tell the young person who can't afford college, you're on your own, or tell somebody who's working hard, but doesn't have health care, tough luck.But it's going to require us to work hard. It's going to require us to have faith. In 2008, I used to tell you, in the height of all the excitement, I would remind people I'm not a perfect man, and I said I'd never be a perfect President. But what I said was--I made a promise. I said I'd always tell you where I stood and I'd always tell you what I believed and I would work as hard as I could, as hard as I knew how, every single day, every minute of every day, for you. That I would be thinking about you and I'd be fighting for you and advocating for you, for all those folks out there all across the country who know what struggle is, but also know what it means to overcome struggle.And I've kept that promise. I've kept that promise because my faith in the American people is undiminished. And as I travel across the country, I see your decency and I see your strength and I see your resilience, and I am inspired. And so I am just as determined as I ever have been.I believe in this country, and I believe in you. And if you still believe in me, I'm going to need you to stand with me in this election and get on the phone and knock on doors and talk to your friends and talk to your neighbors. And we are going to fight, and we are going to struggle, and we're going to finish what we started in 2008 and remind the world just why it is that America is the greatest nation on Earth.God bless you. God bless the United States of America.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody! Thank you. Everybody, please have a seat. Let me begin by just reemphasizingin case you haven't heard me say it beforeI love Austin, Texas. Love Austin! And some of it is the music, and some of it is all the extraordinary businesses that are being started here and UT and all that. The main reason I love Austin is because I've got so many good friends in Austin. And I am so grateful to all of you for taking the time to be here. Now, I have to confess, I told Tom I was really interested in just seeing the bats fly out. [Laughter] But apparently, Secret Service has decided we got to keep all the screens down. I may still try to take a peek later. [Laughter] But there are a couple of people I want to acknowledge. First of all, obviously, Tom and Lynn, these guys have been there since the beginning. They were there in some of my first events in Texas, first events of my Presidential campaign. They have been stalwart friends for many years now. And their entire family have just been wonderful. I appreciate every single one of you. And I can't thank you enough, not just for opening your home up today, but also for opening up your hearts to me for so many years. Please give them a big round of applause. I'm grateful. A couple other people I just want to mention. Kirk Rudy has been just as tireless. He was at the same first luncheon that I met Tom at and has been our Deputy Finance Chair. So we are grateful to him. I've got a number of other National Finance Committee members who are here. You know who you are, and I just want to say thank you to all of you. And finally, you've got a hometown boy who has been doing great work promoting American business all around the world. I'm a little annoyed at him because we played golf on Sunday. He was my partner, and we were up, and on the 18th hole, he hit it into the sand trap and couldn't get out. [Laughter] And I lost money as a consequence. But despite that fact, I am so grateful that Texas sent Washington Ron Kirk, because he doing a great job. He's doing a great job. So in a relatively intimate setting like this, I want to spend most of my time answering questions and having conversation as opposed to making a long speech. So let me just say a few things at the top and then we'll open it up. First of all, when I think about some of those early events that we had here in Austin and around the country back in 2007, 2008, the reason I ran and the reason I think so many of you supported me was because we had a certain vision of what makes America great. And it doesn't just have to do with the height of our skyscrapers or the power of our military, but it has to do with this basic idea that here in this country, if you work hard, you can make it. It doesn't matter what you look like, where you come from, what your last name isthat if you apply yourself and take responsibility for not just yourself, but your family and your community and your country, that you can succeed. And we felt as if that basic bargain that built the largest middle class in history and made us an economic superpower, that that was fading away for too many people. And this was before the financial crisis hit. For the last 3 years, obviously, we've been occupied with trying to restore what had been lost during that crisis: millions of people who had lost jobs, people whose homes were underwater, businesses that had had to shut down. And we made progress: 4.5 million jobs; 500,000 new manufacturing jobs, the most since the 1990s; the financial system. We were able to right the ship. But our goal wasn't just to recover from the crisis. Our goal was to deal with these longstanding problems that had been holding us back for too long. We have made progress, but we still got a lot more work to do. And what we're seeing in this election, I think, is in some ways a culmination of a debate that's been going on now for a decade about how this country grows and how it succeeds. And the visionthe contrast in visions between the two candidates could not be more stark in this election; in some ways, more stark than it was in 2008. I mean, John McCain believed in campaign finance reform. He believed in climate change. He believed in science. [Laughter] NoI mean, when I speak about climate change, I mean, I think that'sI pay attention to scientists. He believed in immigration reform. And right now what we've seen is just a much more sharp division in terms of how we should move this country forward. And so in some ways, this election I think is more important than in 2008, and it's going to be a very close election. The good news is that the vision that we share for the countryone in which we're investing in education and building our transportation networks and our infrastructure and investing in science and research and balancing our budget and reducing our debt and deficits in ways that are balanced so that we are thinking about future generations and we're asking everybody to do their fair share, including those of us who have been incredibly blessed by this Nationit turns out that that vision is one that a lot of Americans believe in. And I have confidence that it's the right vision for the country. The challenge is, is that we're still recovering from this enormous, catastrophic economic crisis, and so people feeleven if they may prefer our visionfrustrated with the fact that the economy hasn't grown as fast and not everybody has gotten their jobs back that were lost during that recession. And so that creates noise, and it allows the other side not to present anything new, but rather to simply argue over and over again that the economy is not where it needs to be and it's Obama's fault. And if you summarize all the negative ads that are being run, that's essentially the message. It's not that there's particular persuasive power in the other side's arguments about how they'd fix the economy. It's simply they want to make this a referendum on the current state of affairs. So we're going to have to fight hard. We're going to have to work hard. Now, I have to admit to you that Texas is not yet a battleground State. [Laughter] I believe it will be. I have confidence in that. But I think that it is going to take a little bit of time. In the meantime, there is still an awful lot of people here in this room, and a lot of people here in Texas, who care about making sure that people don't go bankrupt when they get sick and care about keeping women's health in the hands of women and care about having a smart foreign policy and care about having comprehensive immigration reform. And you can make an enormous difference in this campaign. I note that as I was taking photos, some of you have dispatched your children to work in Pennsylvania, in Virginia, in some of the battleground States. All of you are making enormous contributions to the campaign. I just want you guys to know that if we stay with this and we work hard, we're going to win this thing, because I have confidence in the American people and their core decency and their good instincts. And if we stay on this, then we're going to succeed not just over the next 4 years, but I think we'll set the tone and the track for America's success for the next several decades. So thank you very much for all that you do. I appreciate it. Thank you.",2008,obama
"Thank you. Thank you, everybody. Please, have a seat. Have a seat. Well, look, it is wonderful to see you, all of you. Obviously, I want to start off by thanking the whole Watts family for their incredible hospitality. It's Mikal's birthday, so I hope everybody has wished him a happy birthday. And, Tammy, congratulations for putting up with him for this long. [Laughter] A couple of other people I have to acknowledge: First of all, one of our great public servants, somebody who is battling on behalf of selling American products and American goods all across the country, but who lost some money this weekend because I partnered with him in golf[laughter]Ron Kirk is here. In addition, obviously, your outstanding mayor, Julian Castro is here. Congressman Charlie Gonzalez is in the house. Former HUD Secretary and all around good guy, Henry Cisneros is here. Texas Democratic Party Chair Gilberto Hinojosa is in the house. And one of our national cochairs and a dear friend, Eva Longoria is here. So in settings like this I usually don't like to give a long speech. I just had a terrific event over at the convention center. What I'd like to do is spend most of my time just having a conversation with all of you and answering questions, taking suggestions. But I will tell you that although Texas is not quite a battleground State, the issues that face the country are obviously as relevant here as they are anywhere. And right now we've got two stark choices, two fundamentally different visions about where to take the country. You've got my opponent, his allies in Congress, allies here in the Lone Star State, who believe that the way you grow an economy, the way to achieve prosperity, is from the top down, and a recipe of more tax cuts that benefit a lot of folks in this room, including myself, and elimination of rules and regulations that protect consumersfrom polluters and unscrupulous lenders or reckless behavior on Wall Streetthat that's the recipe for success, that's where we need to go. I've got a different vision. It's a vision that I fought for in 2008and some of you joined mea vision we're still fighting for, that I've been fighting for since I got into office. It's a vision that says the Government can't solve every problem and shouldn't try, but it is a vision that says what makes this country great is the fact that anybody, anywhere, if they work hard enough and are willing to take responsibility, they can make it. And there are some ingredients that we invest in as a country and as a community to make sure that the ladders of opportunity exist: a great education system, a great transportation and infrastructure system, investments in basic science and research. Investments in the kind of safety net that encourages work, but also says that if you have a string of bad luck, or if somebody in your family is disabled, or when you finally, after lifelong work, retire, that you can live a life of dignity and respect, and an approach to our deficits and debt that says everybody does their fair share. And that was my commitment even before I ran for office and that we've fought for the last 3 yearswe've got a long way to go. There are still way too many people who are out of work, too many homes that are still underwater across the country, too many small businesses that are struggling. But in addition to making sure that we didn't fall into a great depression, we've tried to systematicallywhether it's the health care bill, whether it's our approach to expanding access to college education for young people, whether it is putting in place rules and regulations to protect from the kind of chaos of Wall Street that we saw in 2007, 2008everything we've done has been designed to fulfill that goal of making sure that we're building a strong middle class and we're continuing to create avenues of opportunity for those who are working hard to get into the middle class. Now, this is going to be a close election. I don't think there's any doubt about that, not because the other side has particularly new or interesting ideas, but because the economy is still struggling for a lot of folks. And as a consequence, your help, your support is going to be critical. But I'm optimistic about our prospects of being able to finish what we started in 2008. And the reason I'm optimistic is because what the American people showed me in 2008 is that when they determine what is true and what is right and they come together, it doesn't matter how much money the special interests spend, it doesn't matter how many television ads are run, ultimately[inaudible]. And I think one of the great privileges of being President is as I travel around the country and meet people from all walks of lifeevery race, every region, every faiththere's a core decency to the American people, a basic goodness and grit and determination of the American people, that gives me great confidence about our future. So I just want to say to all of you, thank you for your extraordinary support. Again, thanks to the Watts family for hosting us. And I guarantee, if all of you stay with me and keep on working hard for the next 4 months, then I'm going to have the nextanother 4 years to do the work that needs to be done. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Well, to Wayne and Quinn and all of you who are here, thank you. I have fond memories of being here. It was, I think, just as spectacular a day, it was just as beautiful. And I think Alice Waters was cooking. And part of the reason I remember that is because I've got a staff guy, Marvin Nicholsonsome of you know MarvinMarvin doesn't believe in eating vegetables. [Laughter] So he's still traumatized by[laughter]I'm just saying, I was mentioning the last time we were here, and Alice Waters was cooking, and yes. [Laughter] Marvin's general palate runs between hotdogs and hamburgers, soand pizza. [Laughter] That's true. Sochicken tenders. [Laughter] Anyway, we had a wonderful time then, and so many of you have been friends and supporters ever since. And so I'm grateful to all of you. Because this is a more intimate setting, I'm not going to give a long speech. What this gives me an opportunity to do is really have a conversation with you, and I want to save as much time as possible for questions and answers and comments that all of you may have. But let me just summarize a little bit about what I'm seeing out there. First of all, obviously, yesterday I spent time in Aurora, Colorado, after the terrible tragedy that they went through. And I spent time with the families, and the medical staff, the first-responders. And sometimes, when bad things happen, horrible things happen, I think it's easy for us to slip into despair. And yet if you had spent some time, like I did, with those people, who had faced down just unimaginable pain with strength and grace, it would make you extraordinarily optimistic about America. And one of the messages that I tried to deliverbecause if you're just paying attention to debates in Washington, sometimes, you feel as if the country is constantly arguing and everybody is down and outwhen you travel the country and you meet people, Americans are strong, and they are resilient, and they are optimistic, and they are confident about their future and their kids' futures. They recognize that there's dysfunction in Washington, and they'd like to see it changed. And they recognize that the economy is not working for everybody the way it should, and they'd like to see that changed. But they understand as well as anybody that we are incredibly blessed with a country that is the closest thing to, I think, a form of government that allows all of us to achieve and live out our dreams. And they are thankful for it every day, and all they want to see is that their leadership reflect the same decency and common sense that they try to apply every single day in their lives. Now, obviously, we've gone through, since I last saw you, the worst financial crisis and the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. The good news is that we've made progress since that time: added 4.5 million new jobs, half a million new manufacturing jobs. Even the weakest sectors of the economy, like housing, are starting to pick up again. And so we are in a much better position now, in part because of the work that my administration has done: saving the auto industry and stabilizing the financial system. We're in a much stronger position now than we were the day I was sworn in. The bad news is, we've still got some headwinds. There are still millions of people who are out of work, millions of people whose homes are underwater. And people are still wondering, how do we get back to an economy where the middle class is growing and the economic growth translates into broader opportunity for everyone, where America is competitive in a global economy and hard work and responsibility pay off. And this election, in some ways, is going to be more important than 2008, because I think right now we've got as clear a choice as we've seen in our lifetimes. You've got one side that believes that the way we're going to grow the economy and broaden opportunity is through additional tax cuts, $5 trillion worth, mostly going to folks who don't need those tax cuts and really aren't asking for them. And then, if you combine that with stripping away regulations on Wall Street or on polluters or on insurance companies, that somehow that will unleash the free market, and everybody will be better off. That's the theory. It's a theory we tested for almost a decade. And it didn't work. We saw sluggish job growth. We saw greater inequality. We saw median incomes and wages go down. And it culminated in the worst crisis of our lifetimes. I've got a different theory. It's one that says, yes, we've got to reduce our deficits and bring down our debt and we've got to do it in a balanced way by making sure that those of us who've been blessed by this country are giving back a little bit more and going back to the Clinton tax rates; that we're cutting out spending that we don't need, but we're also still investing in basic research and science, that we're investing in infrastructure, that we're investing in the education of every kid and not just some, that we have smart regulations in place that are going to deal with issues like climate change and that are going to make sure that our financial system operates in a transparent and effective way. And so this debate plays itself out across the board on almost every issue. And you are not in a battleground State here in California[laughter]and as a consequence, you are spared from the unprecedented amount of negative, primarily negative, advertising that's on TV right now. But over the next 3 months, this debate is going to be joined, and we as a country are going to have to make a decision about not only how do we grow our economy, but how do we make sure that this continues to be a place where if you work hard, you can make it, and where everybody is doing their fair share and everybody has a fair shot and everybody is playing by the same set of rules. I'm confident that the American people will make the right choice. And it's interesting, when you actually present, stripped from the politics, and you just present in a fair way these two alternative visions, a strong majority agrees with us. But what's going to make this a close race is the fact that the economy is still recovering; the challenges we've seen in Europe are blowing back onto our shores. And most people analyze the economy not through some macroeconomic analysis, they evaluate it in terms of do I have a job, do my kids have a job, how is my home value doing? And in that environment, people are still going through a tough time. So this is going to be a close race, and it's going to be a challenging race. But I am as invigorated and as determined as I've ever been to win it because I believe that there's no challenge that we're facing right now that is not solvable. The problem is we've got a stalemate in Washington, and I'm confident that if we break that stalemate, then the 21st century is going to be the American century just like the 20th. So thank you very much, everybody.",2008,obama
"Thank you, everybody. Thank you. Thank you so much. Everybody, have a seat. It is great to be back in the Pacific Northwest. And I couldn't ask for somebody I admire more to introduce me than Jim Sinegal. And for him and Jan, they have just been extraordinary friends. They are unbelievably gracious. And the story of Costco and everything that you guys have done, I think, is representative of what America is all aboutentrepreneurship, vision, value for your money[laughter]treating your workers right: doing well and doing good at the same time and being part of a broader community that takes your responsibilities for this city, this State, and this country really seriously. I am so grateful for your support. I do want to just correct one thing though. When I called Jim, I said congratulations. I was confident about the hot dog. [Laughter] You don't mess with something if it ain't broke. [Laughter] But what I did say was, Jan is probably going to be driven crazy if you're just sitting around the house all day; you need to get involved in the campaign[laughter]because you're a little too young to just be puttering around. And for the two of them to take up this effort with such energy is something that I will always be grateful for. There are a couple of other people I want to acknowledge. Your outstanding Governor, Christine Gregoire is here. We love her. And an outstanding Member of Congress, who, like another guy of similar name, knows something about how to get the economy growing and cares about working people, Adam Smith is here. He wasthere he issomewhere. He's here somewhere, I know he is. And all of you are here. So because this is not, like, a huge rally, what I want to do instead of giving a long speech is spend some time answering some questions and taking some comments from all of you. But let me try to just at the top frame, I think, the choice that the country is going to be confronting and the debate that we're going to be having over the next 3 to 4 months. As Jim mentioned, when I came into office, we were going through the worst recession, the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. Lost 800,000 jobs the month I was sworn into office. And because of some timelyand not always popularsteps that we took in that first year, we were able to save an auto industry, get the economy growing within 6 to 8 months of me taking office, started adding jobs shortly thereafter. We've now seen almost 2 years of private sector job growth: about 4.5 million jobs created; about half a million in the manufacturing sector, the fastest growth we've seen in the manufacturing sector since the 1990s. Saved an auto industry, stabilized the financial system. And we have started to seeeven in some sectors that were hardest hit, like housingsome modest improvement. That's the good news. The bad news is that there are still millions of folks who are out of work, but desperately want to work. There are still folks whose homes are underwater. And most importantly, when I ran in 2008, the goal wasn't to get back to where we were right before the crisis struck. The goal was to restore a sense that in this country, if you work hardno matter what you look like or where you come fromyou can get ahead. That you can afford to own a home. That won't go bankrupt when you get sick. That your kids can get a good education and go to college and aspire to things that you never dreamed of. That you can retire with dignity and respect. That core middle class dream that some of us may have exceeded when it comes to our bank accounts, but that really is the glue that made us the envy of the world: this idea that if you work hard, you can make it, and if you act responsibly, you will be rewarded. And the challenge was that, for a decade, that really wasn't the case. People were working harder and making less. Costs were going up for things like college and health care. A lot of jobs seemed as if they were being shipped overseas. And the middle class was feeling less secure, and those who wanted to work hard to get into the middle class saw fewer and fewer laddersfewer rungs on the ladder into opportunity. So it hasn't been enough. Even though job one was to get us back on a path of recovery, the broader mission is how do we make sure that everybody has got a fair shot in this society, everybody is doing their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same set of ruleswhich is why health care reform was important, because that's part of security for middle class families. That's why Wall Street reform was important, because we've got to make sure that people have confidence in our financial system and that it's not being gamed or reckless bets don't potentially bring down the entire financial system. That's why education reform has been so important. So the initiatives through things like Race to the Top, where we've gotten 46 States to initiate serious reforms, not with a lot of money, but with enough to incentivize best practices; and then, at the higher education level, work that we've done to expand Pell grants, to make sure that there is a tuition tax credit for middle class families to help them send their kids to college; initiatives that we're now moving forward to create more engineers and more scientists and more mathematicians so that we can keep our competitive edgeall those steps aren't just going to pay short-term dividends, they're also laying the foundation for long-term success. Now, the debate in this campaign is going to be whether we continue down that road to progress or whether we take a sharp turn back to the policies that I believe got us into this mess in the first place. My opponent's basic vision can be described pretty simply. You take the Bush tax cuts, you add on top of it an additional $5 trillion worth of tax cuts that would disproportionately benefit folks like us that don't need them. To the extent that there's even an attempt to reduce the deficit, it's done by slashing investments in education, voucherizing critical safety net programs like Medicare, reducing our investment in basic research and science. And along with stripping away regulations that we've put in place through the health care bill or Wall Street reform or the enforcement that we think is important to make sure that our air is clean and our water is clean, that somehow, the market is going to be unleashed and prosperity will rain down on everybody. Now, that's their theory. I disagree with that theory. I think it's wrong, partly because, empirically, we tried it. We tried it for a decade, and it didn't work. And the approach that I'm talking about in terms of balanced deficit reduction and investments in science and education and infrastructure, we've tried that too, the last time there was a Democratic President. And we created 23 million new jobs and went from deficit to surplus. And by the way, businesspeople, large and small, did really well, because one of the lessons of our economic history is, is that when we've got a strong middle class, then businesses have customers, and everybody does well, everybody grows. So that's what's at stake in this election. There are obviously a lot of other things at stake. On foreign policy, I think it was the right thing to do to end the war in Iraq and refocus attention on Al Qaida and now transition out of Afghanistan. I think it was the right thing to do for us to end torture and make sure that we applied rule of law to how we deal with a terrorist threat. On issues like women's health, making sure that women control their own health care choices, I think, is important. It's the right thing to do. Ending ""don't ask, don't tell"" and making sure that we are treating our brothers and sisters in the LGBT community with equality and fairness, I think, is the right thing to do. So there are a bunch of other issues as stake here: Supreme Court appointments, you name it. But the central question is going to be how do we create an economy that works for everybody. And I have to tell you, I generally have patience with what the other side says about me. That's the requirement of this job. [Laughter] And if you don't like folks talking about you, you probably shouldn't run for President. The one thing I do have no patience for is this argument that somehow what I'm criticizing is success. That's an argument you hear from the other side: ""Oh, he wants to punish success."" I want to promote success. But what I know is that Jim's story, my story, the story of so many of you, our success was made possible in this country because our parents, our grandparents, our great-grandparentsstretching all the way back to the Foundersthey had a vision that says, you know what, we're going to insist on hard work and individual initiative and we're going to reward risk and entrepreneurship and people are going to have to sweat and sacrifice for their success. But there are some things we're also going to do together to make sure that everybody has a chance. Not everybody is going to succeed, but everybody is going to have a shot at success. That's why we set up a public school system that works. That's how we built extraordinary colleges and universities. That's how we created this amazing infrastructure that allows businesses to move goods and services, not just throughout this Nation, but eventually throughout the world. That's how we sent a man to the Moon. That's how we made the investments that helped to create the Internet. So we want success. We just want to make sure that everybody has a shot. That's what we're fighting for. That's what's at stake in this election. And I hope you guys are willing to work as hard as I am over the next 106 daysnot that I'm counting[laughter]and then you're willing to work with me over another 4 years to make sure that we are moving towards that goal that I think the vast majority of Americans, regardless of whether they're Democrats or Republicans or Independents, all share. Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, everybody! Well, it is good to be with all of you. And I just want to say to Earl and Amanda, thank you so much for opening up your beautiful home. They have been great supports for a very long time. And I want to thank all the other cohoststhe Moores, the Moreheads, the Sladesthank you, all of you, who helped to put this thing together. It is a great, great event. I know it's a little warm out here, but you know, it's summertime. [Laughter] It's summertime, so you're supposed to bead up a little bit. [Laughter] You know, this is going to be my last campaign. I'm term limited; I can't run again. Michelle is perfectly happy with that. [Laughter] But it's made me a little bit nostalgic about some of my first campaigns. I think back to the first time I ran as afor State senate in the South Side of Chicago. And back then, we didn't have a lot of support there initially, so I had to go xerox my flyers at Kinko's. [Laughter] And Michelle and I and some friends, we'd go and knock on doors, and people would say, ""Who?"" ""How do you say that name again?"" [Laughter] I won that first race, and then, I ran for the U.S. Senate. And the thing about Illinois is it's a big State and a diverse State, so I'd have to drive all around the State. And back then, I didn't have Marine One or Air Force One, so I'd do my own driving. I might have a staff person in the passenger seat. And the young people out there, you may not understand this, but we had these things called maps. [Laughter] So we didn't have GPS back then. And they were on pieces of paper, and you'd have to unfold them and then fold them again. [Laughter] And you'd get lost. And then I'd have to find my own parking spot. And if it was raining, I'd have to be reaching in the back to see if I could find an umbrella. But wherever I wentinner city, farm town, suburbswhatever people I was meeting, whatever background they were from, they all had a similar story. It was similar to the story of my family. If I'd met an older personwhat are you talking about, young lady? [Laughter] I'm calling you out. She is talking about how to get her picture right. [Laughter] I'm just teasing you. [Laughter] But if I met an older veteran, I'd think about my grandparents and how my grandfather fought in World War II. When he came back, he was able to go to college on the GI bill. And my grandparents were able to buy their first home with an FHA loan. And if I met a single mom, I'd think about my mom and how, even though she didn't have money and she only had the support of her parentsmy grandparentsshe was able to put herself through school, work at the same time, and still give her kids a great education. And I would think aboutif I'd met a working couple, I'd think about Michelle's parents. Some of you may know, Michelle's dad had MS, so by the time I met him, he could barely walk, had to use two canes. And he'd have to wake up an hour earlier than everybody else to get dressed and get to work on time. But he never missed a day of work. And Michelle's mom worked as a secretary most of her life at a bank. And they didn't have a lot, but they were able to give their children, Michelle and her brother, the kind of education and love and support that would allow them to pursue their dreams. And so the point is that everywhere I went I'd meet people with the same story. And at its core was this basic idea that here in America, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, you should be able to make it if you work hard. You should be able to get ahead if you act responsibly. It's that idea that built the strongest middle class on Earth and made us an economic superpower. And the idea that being in the middle class, by the way, was not necessarily a matter of your bank account. It had to do with could you find a job that paid a living wage, that supported a family, could you make sure you were able to have a home that you could call you own; that you wouldn't go bankrupt when you get sick; that you would be able to give your kids a great education and they could achieve things that you never even dreamed of, and then, hopefully, you could retire with some dignity and some respect. That was the idea of America. And when we decided in 2008 to launch this improbable campaign, the idea behind it was that idea: How do we restore an America where everybody can make it if they try? Because we had gone through a decade in which it hadn't been true for a lot of folks. I mean, the decade before I was sworn in, we saw the most sluggish job growth in decades. A few people were doing very well, but for the vast majority of people, wages and incomes were going down while the cost of everything from college to health care were going up. And this all culminated in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. So what we said was, America deserves better: deserves better leadership, deserves a better vision. And a lot of people didn't give us a chance. But because of you, we were able not just to win an election, but begin this process of turning America towards a better vision for the future. Now, over the last 3 years, we've had a lot of work to do. But because of our efforts, instead of losing 800,000 jobs per month, we created 4.5 million jobs over the last several years, half a million in manufacturing, strongest manufacturing job growth since the 1990s. We saved an auto industry that was on the brink of collapse. We were able to stabilize the financial system, help small businesses, and slowly, the unemployment rate has begun to come down. But we understand we've got more work to do. We're not there yet. There's still millions of people who are still out of work, and we've got too many people whose housingwhose homes are underwater. Too many people still struggling to pay the bills. So our goal was not just to get back to where we were before the crisis. Our goal was to build an economy that would last for decades to come, for the next generation. And that's why, even as we were working on fixing the economy, we also said let's make sure that nobody goes bankrupt when they get sick. Let's pass a health care law that can ensure that all Americans have access to high-qualityto health care. That's the reason why we reformed our student loan system so that we could expand Pell grants and make sure that millions of people were able to get thousands of dollars of assistance in sending their kids to college and, by the way, also making sure that young people were dealing with less debt when they graduate. That's why we put in place Wall Street reform so we don't have another taxpayer-funded bailout. Because we insisted that banks have enough capital requirements and that they have a plan so that if they make bad decisions, it's not going to cost you any money; it will cost them money. And so the question is, are we going to continue down this path of building an economy that lasts, where everybody gets a fair shot, everybody does their fair share, everybody plays by the same set of rules? I believe that's the right vision for the future. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America. Now, there's as stark a choice in this election as we've seen in a very long time, because the other side just has some different ideas. Mr. Romney's basic idea, and his allies in Congress, is what I call top-down economics. He wants toBill Clinton a couple months ago said, they basically want to do the same thing that they did before, ""except on steroids."" [Laughter] So they don't want to just continue the Bush tax cuts, they want to add another $5 trillion of tax cuts on top of that, mostly going to folks who don't need tax cuts and weren't even asking for tax cuts. It will be paid for by gutting our investments in education, our investments in infrastructure, our investments in research and development, voucherizing Medicare. That is not a recipe for long-term growth. And we've got an example of how they approach problems right now because the Senate just passed a bill that I have been pushing that says right now, if we don't do anything, if Congress does nothing, everybody's taxes go up on January 1, which would be tough on the economy and tough on a lot of families. So what I've said is let's say that everybody who makes $250,000 a year or less, that their taxes won't go upthe incomes taxes will not go up a dime. Let's give them some certainty. By the way, that includes 97 percent of small businesses. The Senate passed it; the House so far has not. If we get 218 votes out of the House, the vast majority of the country will have certainty next year that their taxes will not go up. But so far at least, the House's attitude is, we're not going to do that unless we also get a trillion dollar's worth of tax cuts for the wealthy. That's a bad bargain for America. That's not how we grow an economy. I don't believe in top-down economics. I believe in middle-out economics and bottom-up economics. I believe that when everybody is doing well, then folks at the top do well also because they've got customers who have money in their pockets. Audience members. Yes! The President. That's the choice in this election. And the good news is you're going to be able to be the tie breaker. You can break this stalemate. And that is why I'm running for a second term as President, to break that stalemate once and for all. So let me tell you what my vision is. My vision is that just as we were able to make sure that the auto industry in America stayed strong, we've got to bet on American workers and American manufacturing, and that means we got to stop giving tax breaks to companies that ship jobs overseas. Let's give tax breaks to companies that are investing right here in the United States of America, right here in Virginia, because we've got the best workers in the world and the best innovation in the world. What we need is a Tax Code that works for folks who are investing here in the United States. That's my vision. My vision is to make sure that our education system is working for every child, not just some children. So I want to help school districts hire the best teachers, new teachers, especially in math and science. I want to open up community colleges for 2 million more people so that they can get trained for the jobs that local businesses are hiring for right now. And I want to make sure that college is even more affordable, not just to continuing the tax credits we put in place, not just continuing the expansion of Pell grants we've put in place, but also let's bring down tuition costs so that our young people are not burdened with debt. Because a higher education, it's not a luxury today; it is an economic necessity in the 21st century. That's what we're fighting for, and that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States. I want to make sure that we are investing in America. I promised I'd end the war in Iraq; we ended it. I said we'd go after Al Qaida; we have gone after them. We are now transitioning out of Afghanistan, putting Afghans in the lead for their country's own security. And now, after a decade of war, I think it makes sense for us to take half the savings from war and let's use it to do some nation-building here at home. Let's make sure that we're rebuilding our roads and our bridges. Let's build broadband lines into rural communities and improve our wireless networks and rebuild our ports and airports. We can put people to work right now doing the work that America needs done. It will be good for those hardhats who have more money in their pockets. They'll go to restaurants, and they'll shop at local businesses. And the entire economic will get a lift, plus we will make ourselves more competitive for decades to come. That's how we build an America that lasts. That's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America. I don't want to refight the battles we've already fought. Health care was the right thing to do; 30 million people will have health insurance that did not have it before. Your children can stay on your health insurance plan until they're 26 years old. Women are getting preventative care. We are not going to go back to the old days when insurance companies could just jerk you around for no reason. The Supreme Court has spoken. We are now implementing it, and America is going to be better for it. The same way that we are not going back to the days when you couldn't serve the country you love just because of youwho you love. We ended ""don't ask, don't tell."" That was the right thing to do. We are moving forward. We're not going to roll back funding for Planned Parenthoodas my opponent opposesbecause I think women should have control over their health care choices just like everybody else does. We're not going backwards. And when it comes to the debt and the deficit, we're going to lower it, but we're going to do it in a balanced, responsible way. We're not going to lower it on the backs of the poor and the middle class. We're going to make cuts in programs that don't work. We're going to streamline Government. We've made Government already more responsive, and we're going to continue. But we're also going to ask the wealthiest folks, people like meand yes, I'm sorry, Earl, you qualify[laughter]to do a little bit more because we have been incredibly blessed. Audience members. Yes! The President. And this country gave us opportunity, and we've got to make sure that we are giving opportunity to the next generation. That's a worthy investment. That's how America grew. We built this Nation together. And I want to make sure that we continue to have that vision as we think about Malia and Sasha, your children, your grandchildren. I don't want to go backwards. Audience member. Me either! The President. We're going to need to go forwards. Now, when we ran in 2008, I told you this would not be easy and this would not be quick. And I told you it might take more than one year, more than one term, maybe even more than one President. But we've made progress. And so now what you're going to be seeing over the next 3 months is more money spent, mostly on negative ads than we've ever seen before. Some folks are writing $10 million checks to try to replace me. And basically, they make the same argument all the time, because they know their economic theories don't really workor at least they don't sellso their argument will be: The economy is not where it should, and it's Obama's fault. They'll have variations on it, but they'll do the same ad over and over and over and over again. You're already seeing them in Virginia and some other States. And look, you always got to be a little concerned when folks are writing $10 million checks. But what gives me confidence and what gives me faith is you. So many of you supported us in 2008. And remember, we were outspent for a time, and we were counted out. I've been outspent before. But what I've understood is that when the American people really start paying attention, they can cut through the nonsense. When the American people are paying attention, they're the ones who will determine what is true, what is right, what's consistent with our values. And when all of you start thinking back to your own family's history. Some of you, parents, grandparents came here as immigrants. Some of you, your ancestors came here in chains. But the running story has been our capacity, each generation, to say if we work hard, there's a better day ahead; that if we act responsiblywhether we're working on a farm or in a factory or in a mill or down in a minethat next generation, they're going to be able to do things I couldn't do. So maybe I can't own a business, but if I really work hard, some day, maybe my daughter owns a business. I might not own a home, but if I work really hard, maybe some day, my son, he'll build homes. I might not be able to vote, but some day, maybe a great-grandson, or a great-great grandson will end up being a Senator or a mayor or maybe even the President of the United States. That has been the story of our history. And when the American people are reminded of that, when we focus on what's best in our traditions, then I don't fear $10 million checks. Then I have confidence that change will happen, and we will keep moving forward. So let me just say to all of you, in addition to thanks, we've got a little over a hundred days left. In that campaign in 2008, we went through a lot of ups and downs, and I tried to not make promises that I couldn't keep. So I promised I'd end the war in Iraq; I ended it. I promised, we'd cut taxes for middle class families; we did. But the biggest promise I made, I said, I'm not a perfect manMichelle can tell you that[laughter]and I won't be a perfect President. But what I can promise you is that I will always tell you what I think, I'll always tell you where I stand, and I will spend every single day fighting as hard as I know how for you. And I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise because I believe in you. And in you, I see my own story. In your grandparents, I see my grandparents. In your children, I see Malia and Sasha. I know where you've been because that's where I've been. That's where Michelle has been. And we know what it means to struggle, but we also know what it means to receive the incredible blessings of this country. So if you still believe in me and you're willing to stand with meand keep on going, not just today, not just tomorrow, not just next week, not just next month, but for the next 105 days, and then 4 more years after thatthen we'll finish what we started. We will bring this economy all the way back and more. And we'll remind the world just why it is the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth. Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless the United States of America. Appreciate you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hey! Everybody, sit down. Sit down. Thank you. Thank you so much, guys. Thank you, everybody. Everybody, have a seat, have a seat. It is wonderful to see all of you. To those of you who helped to make this evening possible, I could not be more grateful. I've got folks in the room here who have just been tireless in their efforts not just in this campaign, but since 2007, and some of you who have been involved since 2003, when I first ran for the Senate. I've got a friend in Chicago some of you may know: Ab Mikva. He was a Federal judge, and he went on to be White House Counsel. And he described being friends with a politician as perpetually having somebody in collegeevery so often you have to write this check[laughter]and fortunately, I'm about to graduate. [Laughter] So this is it, guys. [Laughter] Audience member. So you're not going to call us for the library? The President. No, no, no. [Laughter] Somebody else will make that call. [Laughter] This does also remind me of the season that we're in. Jim Messina tells this storymy campaign managerhe was in some event, and this young couple who was there with their adorable 4-year-old son, and I guess there was a picture of me somewhere, and so they were very excited. They said, ""Sammy, who's that?"" And he said, ""That's Barack Obama."" ""And what does Barack Obama do?"" And the boy thinks for a second and he says, ""He approves this message."" [Laughter] So that's what I do. [Laughter] I approve this message. [Laughter] Fortunately, you guys are not in the battleground States, so you're not completely subjected to this stuff. But in an intimate setting like this, I want to spend most of my time in a conversation answering your questions. Let me just make a few remarks at the top, first of all, about the state of the economy and the country and then talk a little bit about the campaign. Obviously, we're still recovering from the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. We have made progress: 4.5 million new jobs, half a million in manufacturing, the strongest since 1990. The housing market, which has been a huge headwind on the recovery, is just now starting to tick back up again. And there are so many reasons why America is well positioned relative to the rest of the world to make sure the 21st century is still the American century. But we have so much more work to do. Obviously, there are millions of people who are still out of work, in particular, in States like California or Arizona or Florida. There are hundreds of thousands of people whose homes are still underwater. And so everything that we continue to do as an administration, everything that I intend to do as President in the second term, is geared towards how do we rebuild this economy so that it is strong, lasting, and most importantly, provides broadening opportunity for Americans who are willing to work hard to get in the middle class. That means making sure that we've got investments in education. And I could not be more proud of the education agenda that we've pursued over the last 4 years. It doesn't pay immediate dividends, but we've seen over 40 States initiate major education reform that provides more flexibility, trains teachers more effectively, increases accountability, but is not having teachers in the classroom teach to the test. It means we've got to invest in basic science and research, which we have done. And a major part of the Recovery Act boosted our investments in things like NIH. But we've got more to do to reach a goal that I set, which is we need to double our R&D investment so that it matches up with our historic spending on research and development. It's been falling off for many years. We've still got an enormous amount to do on energy. There is a convergence here of environmental interests and economic interests. We've doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars and doubled the production of clean energy, but if we can do more, then we can continue to keep pace with the goal that I set of drastically reducing our imports of foreign oil and take some carbon out of the atmosphere at the same time and create hundreds of thousands of jobs all across the country. And we've got more work to do in achieving the kind of fiscal balance that will provide us a framework for long term growth. And that involves making some tough spending cutsa trillion which we've already made, a trillion and a half of which we've identified, additional cutsand about $1.5 trillion worth of increased revenue, primarily from folks in this room and those like us. And if we do that, then we can stabilize our budget in a balanced, sensible way, and still make the investments that we need in the future. We're going to have some continued headwinds over the next several months. Europe is still a challenge, and a lot of people in this room who have business in Europe understand that. I don't think ultimately that the Europeans will let the euro unravel. But they're going to have to take some decisive steps. And I'm spending an enormous amount of time trying to work with themand Tim Geithner is spending a lot of time working with themto recognize that the sooner they take some decisive action, the better off we're going to be. And it's a testament, by the wayor it's an interesting contrast to what's happened here. The fact that we took some decisive action in 2008 and 2009, despite its unpopularity, indicates what we avoided, this chronic bleeding wound that has been an enormous problem not just for Europe now, but for the entire global economy. So if we can stabilize Europe, position ourselves on education, on science and technology, on energy, and a few other pieces of unfinished business like comprehensive immigration reform, then there's no reason why America should not thrive in the decades to come. We also have to get through a campaign though. And right now the economy is still rough enough for enough people that this is going to be a close election. I'm confident that we are running a good campaign and will continue to run a good campaign. But we are being outspent substantially by the other side, and the super PACs are engaging in an experience we have not seen in America democracy for quite some time. They are spending like nobody's business, mostly on negative ads. And we're going to have to continue to compete. We don't anticipate that we're going to match them dollar for dollar; we don't need to. But we are going to have to make sure that we can get our message out effectively. And this phase of the campaign, I think you're seeing a lot of negative ads and a lot of contrast ads, although when people start saying how terrible it is I just have to remind them that take a look at what Jefferson and Adams had to say about each other, and democracy has always been pretty rough and pretty messy. There is going to be, though, as the summer winds down and we get into the fall, the need for voters in these swing States to know not just what they're voting against, but also what they're voting for. And so we'll be spending a lot of time talking about the specific agenda that I intend to pursue in the second term, which I think will make sure that this economy is going full guns. So upshot is if the election were held today, I think it would be close, but I think we'd win. And we now have 99 days left. If I can say that every single day for the next 99 days, then we will be able to embark on the next phase of this journey. And I'm so glad that you guys are all with me because I couldn't do it without you. So thank you very much.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, Connecticut! Thank you so much. Well, it is wonderful to be back in Connecticut. A couple of people I want to give a shout-out to: First of all, your outstanding Governor, Dan Malloy, is here. Lieutenant Governor Nancy Wyman is here. Senator Dick Blumenthal is here. A outstanding trio of Congressmen: Rosa DeLauro, Jim Himes, Chris Murphy. And please give it up for Ben Harper; we are so grateful to him. It was my birthday this weekend. I was 51 years old. And Michelle says I don't look a day over 50. [Laughter] She was pointing out, ""I think in the last week you've gotten more gray hair."" [Laughter] But that's okay. Obviously, I know that all of you have been spending most of this week rooting for our unbelievable athletes in London. On the flight over here, I've got to admit, I was spending most of my time watching U.S. women's soccer. They won, by the way, 4 to 3. It was a tight game. And it's just an extraordinary reminder of the fact that even when we've got political differences, when it comes to our love of this country and the incredible people who represent us, we are unified. And it's a very gratifying feeling during the course of a political season, where sometimes the fact that we are unified around so many important things gets hidden. But unless you've been able to hide from your television or your cable is broke[laughter]you are aware that there is a pretty intense campaign going on right now. And it's a healthy thing because that's what our democracy is about. Itsometimes it's messy, and folks get excited. But in this election in particular, the reason that there is such an intensity is because the choice that we face in November could not be bigger. Could not be bigger. It's not just a choice between two candidates or two political parties. More than any election in recent memory, it is a choice about two fundamentally different paths for our country. And the direction that we choose, the direction that you choose when you step into that ballot box in Novemberin that voting boothI guess you shouldn't step into the ballot box. [Laughter] Step into the voting booth. That's probably illegal. [Laughter] The impact that you'll have not just on our lives, but on our kids and our grandkids for decades to come is remarkable. Now, 4 years ago, we came togetherand it wasn't just Democrats, we had Independents and Republicans coming togetherto restore that basic bargain that made America an economic superpower, made us the most prosperous economy in the world. And it's a bargain that says, if you work hard in this country, then your work should be rewarded. It's an idea that says if you put in enough effort, if you act responsibly, then you can find a job that pays the bills, and you can afford a home that you can call our own, and you can count on health care if you get sick and put away a little bit for retirement and, most importantly, give your kids the kind of education that allows them to dream even bigger and do even better than you did. That's at the core of what America is about. That's the American promise. And we understood that restoring it wouldn't be easy. We had gone through a decade in which jobs were being shipped overseas and job growth was sluggish and incomes were falling even as the costs of health care and college and gas and groceries were going up. So we understood that it was going to take more than one year, or one term, or even one President to meet these challenges. And that was before the middle class was hammered by the worst economic crisis in most of our lifetimes, a crisis that robbed many of our friends and neighbors of the security of a job or their homes or their savings. That crisis pushed the American Dream even further out of reach for too many working people. But one of the great privileges of being President is you get to see Americans from every walk of life, and one consistent theme is, we don't buckle, we don't break, we're tougher than tough times. And so over the last 3 years, we have devoted ourselves to bringing this country back to where it needs to be. And we're not there yet, but we created 4 million new jobs and 500,000 in manufacturing. An auto industry that was on its knees has come roaring back. We've said that we've got to make college more accessible and been able to provide millions of more young people access to higher education. We made sure that in a country as remarkable as ours that nobody is going to go bankrupt when they get sick. And through all these battles, through all these struggles, understanding that we're not where we need to be, what we've constantly been able to affirm is that this economic crisis didn't change our character. It didn't change who we are. It didn't change what made us great. It didn't change our determination and our resilience. And what also hasn't changed is what we came together for in 2008. It's just made our mission that much more urgent. We are here to build an economy where work pays off so that no matter what you look like or where you come from, you can make it here if you try. That's what this campaign is about. That's what this campaign is about, Connecticut, and that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States. And we understand there are no quick fixes or easy solutions to these challenges, but we know that we have the capacity to meet them. We've got the best workers in the world. We've got the best entrepreneurs in the world. We have the best scientists and the best researchers in the world. We have the best universities and the best colleges in the world. We are a young nation, and we've got the greatest diversity of talent and ingenuity from every corner of the globe. So no matter what the naysayers may say, no matter how dark the picture they try to paint, there's not another country on Earth that wouldn't gladly trade places with the United States of America. So what's standing in our way right now is not the lack of technical solutions to the deficit or to education or to energy. What's standing in our way is our politics: the uncompromising view that says we should be going back to the old, top-down economics that got us into this mess in the first place. And I don't exaggerate when it comes to how my opponent and his allies in Congress view this economy. They believeand this is the sum total of their economic packagethat if we give more tax breaks to some of the wealthiest Americans and we get rid of regulations that keep our air clean and our water clean and make sure consumers aren't getting cheated and make sure insurance companies aren't taking advantage of you, that somehow prosperity will rain down on everybody. That's their theory. That's the path they're proposing. That's where they will take us if we [they; White House correction.] win. It is on Mr. Romney's web site. It is in the form of a bill that passed through the House of Representatives by this Republican Congress. In fact, the entire centerpiece of Mitt Romney's economic plan is a new $5 trillion tax cut. And we've known for a while that a lot of this tax cut would go to the wealthiest 1 percent of all households. But just last week, an independent, nonpartisan organization crunched the numbers. They went through what would it mean to add a $5 trillion tax cut. Just to give you a sense of perspective here, our entire defense budget is aboutlittleit's over $500 billion a year, but it's less than $600 billion. So you're talking about each year, thea tax cut that's equivalent of our defense budget for the next 10 years. And what this policy center did wasit just ran the numbersif you wanted to actually pay for that, what would that mean. And they determined that Governor Romney's plan would effectively raise taxes on middle class families with children by an average of $2,000 to pay for this tax cut. Not to reduce the deficit. Not to invest in things that grow our economy, like education or roads or basic research. He'd ask the middle class to pay more in taxes so that he could give another $250,000 tax cut to people making more than $3 million a year. Audience members. Boo! The President. It's like Robin Hood in reverse. [Laughter] It's Romney Hood. The[applause]. And if this sounds like an idea that's difficult to explain or sell to the American people, you'd be right. [Laughter] So there were all kinds of different gymnastics being performed by the Romney campaign last week. They have tried to sell us this trickle-down, tax cut fairy dust before. And guess what? It does not work. It didn't work then; it won't work now. It's not a plan to create jobs, it's not a plan to reduce our deficit, and it is not a plan to move our economy forward. We do not needI do not need a tax cut. We need tax cuts for working Americans. We need tax cuts for families who are trying to raise kids and keep them healthy and send them to college and keep a roof over their heads. So that's the choice in this election. That's what this is about. That's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States. See, I've got a different plan for America. Four years ago, I promised to cut middle class taxes; that's exactly what I've done, by a total of about $3,600 for the typical family. So I want to keep taxes exactly where they are for the first $250,000 of everybody's income. If your family makes under $250,000like 98 percent of Americans doyou will not see your income taxes increase by a single dime next year. And if you're fortunate enoughas many of you are, as I amto be in the other 2 percent, you still keep the tax cut on the first $250,000 of your income. All we're asking is that, after that, you contribute a little bit more so we can pay down our deficit and invest in things like education that will help us grow. And by the way, we're going to make sure that Government does its part. Government is going to have to cut away the spending that we don't need. We've already cut a trillion dollars' worth of spending that wasn't necessary, and we can find more. Members of Congress here are committed to doing that. We don'twe can't waste taxpayer dollars. But we're not going to pay for a massive new tax cut for folks who don't need it by gutting investments that have always kept the middle class strong. We're going to have to make sure that college is affordable. We've got to make sure that we're rebuilding our infrastructure. We've got to make sure that we're investing in science and technology in this competitive 21st-century economy. We've got to make sure that Medicare is there for our seniors after they've worked hard all their lives. And we can do all that simply by having folks like me go back to the rates that we paid under Bill Clinton. And if you remember, that was when the economy created nearly 23 million new jobs, the biggest budget surplus in history, and a whole lot of millionaires to boot. The interesting thing, when you look at our economic history, is, when a construction worker has got some money in his pocket, he goes out and buys a new car. When a teacher is getting paid a decent wage, that means they can maybe take their family to a restaurant once in a while. And when the middle class is doing well, then businesses do well, and those at the top do well. Everybody does well. That's what we believe in: an economy that grows from the middle class out and the bottom up. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for a second term as President. But look, we're going to havethat's just on tax policy and fiscal issues. There are going to be contrasts throughout this election. When the American auto industry was on the brink of collapse, more than 1 million jobs on the line, Governor Romney said, let's ""let Detroit go bankrupt."" I refused to turn back on a great American industry and its workers. We bet on America's workers. Three years later, the American auto industry has come roaring back. So I want to make sure that this happens not just in the auto industry; let's replicate that. There are manufacturing opportunitiesadvanced manufacturing, high-tech manufacturing opportunitiesall across America, because I want those jobs here. Not in China, not in Germany, I want them in Connecticut. I want them in the United States of America. And so Governor Romney extols his experience in the private sector, investing in companies that have been called ""pioneers"" of outsourcing. I believe in insourcing. I want to giveI want to take away tax breaks for companies shipping jobs overseas. Let's give them to companies that are investing right here in Connecticut, investing in American workers. I said in 2008 I wanted to end the war in Iraq; we ended it. I said we'd go after bin Laden, and we got him. I said that we would blunt the Taliban's momentum, and now we can begin transitioning our troops home. And so after a decade of war, I think it's time to do some nation-building here at home. Our freedom was secured because of the courage and selflessness of our men and women in the United States armed forces. I want to make sure that they don't have to scramble for a job when they come home. I want to make sure that we're investing in a veterans job corps that can give them a chance to go back to work. I want to make sure that they're getting the services that they need. And we can take half the savings that we spent on war, and let's use it to do some nation-building here in the United States of America. Let's rebuild America: rebuilding schools, rebuilding roads, hiring our veterans, making sure they get the care that they have earned. That's the choice in this election. Because Mr. Romney has got a different idea; he said me ending the war in Iraq was ""tragic."" [Laughter] I disagree. [Laughter] That's the choice in this election. Connecticut, I'm running to make sure that America once again is a leader in educating our kids and training our workers. I want to help our schools hire and reward the best teachers, especially in math and science. Let's give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and get the skills that local businesses are looking for right now. We've already done a lot to make millions of young people in a better place to be able to go to college, but I want to also work to help colleges and universities bring the cost of tuition down once and for all. Higher education cannot be a luxury; it is a economic necessity that every American should be able to afford. When it comes to the housing market, Mr. Romney says just let foreclosures bottom out. I don't think that's a solution, I think that's the problem. I want to give every American homeowner the opportunity to take advantage of historically low rates and refinance their homes, save $3,000, use that money to recirculate in the economy. That will help the entire economy grow and improve the housing market. I'm running because I continue to believe that no American should go broke because they get sick. Health care was the right thing to do. The Supreme Court has spoken. We are implementing it now. That's a choice in this election. I believe it was the right thing to do to end ""don't ask, don't tell."" You shouldn't have to hide who you love to serve the country that you love. That's a choice in this election. I don't believe that it is Congress's job to take away the decisions around women's health. I think women should be in charge of their own health care. That's a choice in this election. So all these things, Connecticutwhether it's bringing manufacturing and construction jobs back or protecting your health care or making sure our children get the best education they deserve or making sure that veterans get the care that they have earnedall these things that help make up a middle class life, they all tie together. They're all central to the idea that made this country great: the promise that if you work hard, you can get ahead. The same promise our parents and our grandparents passed down to us. And now it's our responsibility to make sure that our children and grandchildren can enjoy that same American Dream. And over the course of the next 3 months, the other side is going to spend more money than we have ever seen on ads that basically say the same thing you've been hearing for months. They know their economics theory won't sell, so their ads are going to say the same thing over and over again, which is: The economy is not where it needs to be and it's Obama's fault. I mean, there will be variations on the theme, but it's basically[laughter]that's basically their message. And I'm not exaggerating. Their strategists admit it. They say, you know, we're not going to put out any plans. We're just going to see if this works. [Laughter] Now, that may be a plan to win the election, but that's not a plan to create jobs. That's not a plan to grow the economy or revive the middle class. They don't have that plan. I do. So, Connecticut, let me say this. When you're talking to your friends and your neighbors, and they're saying, ""Well, I don't know, I'm not sure,"" you just tell them, look, if you believe that a plan to just cut taxes and eliminate regulations is going to make our economy stronger, even if it means gutting investments in education or infrastructure or science, if you want an America that essentially sets our sights lower, then by all means send these folks to Washington for the next few years. Audience members. No! The President. But you need to ask your friends and your neighbors, you need to ask them wouldn't you be better off if we kept fighting for the things that always made us strong, if we fight to make sure more of our students can afford to go to college? Won't we be better off if we kept developing new sources of American energy? Won't we be better off if we invest in manufacturing and we're selling goods around the world stamped with three proud words: Made in America? Five years from now or 10 years from now or 20 years from now, won't we be better off if we had the courage to keep working and to keep fighting and moving forward, understanding that it's not easy, you know, change has never been easy. I told you in 2008, it wasn't easy? And I told you I'm not a perfect man. I told you I wouldn't be a perfect President. But I always said that I'd tell you what I thought and where I stood. And most of all, I told you I would wake up every single day, fighting as hard as I knew how to make your lives a little bit better. And, Connecticut, I have kept that promise. I've kept that promise, because I still believe in you. And if you still believe in me and you're willing to stand with me and knock on some doors for me, make some phone calls with me, work hard and organize and mobilize with me for the next 3 months, we will finish what we started in 2008, and we will show the world why the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth. Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you, everybody. Well, it is wonderful to be here. And there are just a couple of people I want to acknowledge. First of all, obviously, Harvey and Georgina have just been great friends and have done so much for us, not just in this election, but in the previous one. A couple of other people who I want to mention: your Governor, Dan Malloy, is here, who's doing outstanding work here in Connecticut. I want to thank Anne Hathaway for taking the time to host us. She's spectacular. [Laughter] And I did get a chance to see Batman. [Laughter] And she was the best thing in it. [Laughter] That's just my personal opinion. Aaron Sorkin, who writes the way every Democrat in Washington wished they spoke. [Laughter] Aaron, thank you. And Joanne Woodward, what a treat this is. Joanne and Paul were not only I think what was best about American film, but also just embodied the American spirit in so many ways. And their love story and the way they took so many people under their wing and helped so many people I think made them something more important than just folks in film. And for her to be here, what a great treat that is. So thank you so much for taking the time. Thank you. Now, you know, in these kind of intimate settings, I usually don't make a long speech because what I want to do is have a conversation. And so let me just say a few things at the top. I'll give you a sense of the kind of season we're in. Jim Messina, my campaign manager, tells this story. He was at an event like this, and there was a young couple; they had a 4-year-old boy, cute as can be. And during this campaign event, there was a picture of me there. And so the parents, very proudly, prompt the son, ""Who is that?"" And he says, ""That's Barack Obama."" And they say, ""Well, and what does Barack Obama do?"" And he thinks for a second, and he says, ""Barack Obama approves this message."" [Laughter] Now, that speaks to the state of affairs in politics today. [Laughter] Unless you haveyou don't have a TV set or your cable is busted, you're seeing an awful lot of stuff about politics. And the reason I think there's so much intensity is because we've got a choice that is as stark and as critical as any that we've seen in my lifetime, in some ways, more important than 2008. In 2008, we came togetherand it wasn't just Democrats, it was Independents and some Republicansbecause we recognized that for over a decade the core idea at the heart of this country was at risk: the idea that if you work hard, that hard work is rewarded, that you can make it here if you try, regardless of what you look like, where you come from, what your last name is. And for a decade, we had seen job growth slow, and we had seen jobs moving overseas, and we had seen people working harder and harder, but coming up with less because the costs were going up a lot faster than their wages and their incomes. And this all culminated in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. We have spent 3 years, a little over 3 years now, trying to make sure that this country gets back on its feet. And because of the extraordinary resilience of the American people, we have seen signs of recovery: 4.5 million new jobs, half a million new manufacturing jobs, an auto industry that is reinvigorated. But we didn't work this hard in 2008 just to get back to where we were in 2007. Our notion was that we needed to rebuild a country where the foundations for people who were willing to act responsibly were there for them either to feel security in the middle class or to climb into the middle class and maybe do even better. And that means making sure that we have an education system that works, which is why we've initiated more aggressive education reform across the country than any President in a very long time and the reason that we put so much emphasis on making college more affordable for young people. It meant health care, because in a country this wealthy, we shouldn't go bankrupt when we get sick. And the Affordable Care Act means that 30 million people will have health insurance, but it also means that people who already have health insurance have a little more security. We did an event just before we came here, and there was a woman who clearly is doing fine and is well insured, but she personally thanked me for the health care bill because she said, my husband just got cancer and we weren't sure whether we were going to hit that $1 million limit on our insurance policy. Well, that limit is no longer allowed under the Affordable Care Act, which means they may not lose their house because of an illness. It means making investments in science and research that are what made us an economic superpower. It means having a Tax Code that's fair so that we bring down our deficit not on the backs of folks who are struggling, but we ask those of us who arewho've been incredibly blessed by this country to do a little bit more, understanding that when folks in the middle and the bottom are doing well, everybody does well and the economy grows. It means a foreign policy that recognizes the force of our example and our ideals and our capacity to engage with countries diplomatically is a complement to our incredible military power. And it's not a sign of weakness to say that we are going to reach out around the world and engage people. So we've had a lot of work to do over the last 3 years, and we're not done. We're justwe've gotten on track, but these gains are reversible. And you've got the other party and the other candidate who don't just want to reverse the gains that we've made over the last 3 years, but in many ways, want to reverse gains we've made over the last 40 or 50 or 60 years. When you look at their budget, and they say that they want to initiate a $5 trillion tax cut on top of the Bush tax cut, what that functionally means is that either you blow up the deficit by another $5 trillionwhich they say is irresponsibleor you're going to have to eliminate funding for education, for infrastructure, for basic science and research. Medicare is going to be a voucher system, which means that seniors may end up paying thousands of dollars more for care that they were counting on. When Mitt Romney says he wants to eliminate funding for Planned Parenthood, I think he means it. When he says that Arizona is a model for how we should deal with immigration, I think that fundamentally misunderstands that we're a nation of laws, but also a nation of immigrants. So on a whole host of issues, you've got very stark differences. And the good news is that you guys are the tiebreaker, you and the American people. And when you walk into that ballot boxor don't walk into the ballot box. That's the second time I've said this today. [Laughter] When you walk into the voting boothit's illegal, I'm sure, to walk into a ballot box. [Laughter] When you cast your ballot, you will have the opportunity to determine the course of this country's direction not just tomorrow, or next year, or 5 years from now, but probably for decades to come. And the great privilege of being President is you interact with people from every walk of life, from every corner of the country. And what you discover is the faith that I brought into this office in the American peopletheir core decency and their values and their resilience and their fundamental fairnessthey have never disappointed me. And I'm confident that they won't this time eitherdespite the fact that we've got all these negative ads raining down on our heads and super PACs running around with folks writing $10 million checksbecause when the American people focus and are paying attention, their instincts are sound and they know what makes this country great. That's what we're going to be fighting for, and we've got 90 days to do it. So I hope you guys are onboard. Thank you very much.",2008,obama
"Hello, everybody. It is good to be back home! Let me, first of all, just say something about Barbara. I think so many of you know the incredible contributions she had made to the city. She was a leader in early childhood education. She has helped to reshape and redesign how we think about teaching our young people so that they get a great education. And she has just been an extraordinary friend to me and so many people all across this city and all across the country. And her and Jim Bowman were folks who took me under their wing, and Michelle under their wing, when we were young and still trying to find our way. They have been great friends ever since. And I could not be prouder to be with her today, especially since she let all of you tear up her backyard. [Laughter] So please give Barbara Bowman a big round of applause. I've got so many good friends here, so many familiar faces, people who were with me when I ran my first State senate campaign. That's when we wereI had these little flyers we made at Kinko's. [Laughter] We were very proud of them. The Internet didn't really exist at that point. You remember that? And we had to walk around knocking on doors and folks were""Barama?"" [Laughter] ""Yo momma."" [Laughter] No, no, it's Obama. [Laughter] So when I look at friends who were there and helped me get my start when raising $5,000 was a big deal. And you guys scratched and clawed and helped me get that first seat in the State senate. I know that a couple of friends of mine from my service in the State senate are here. First of all, former Senate president Emil Jones is in the house somewhere and was one of my strongest supporters. And the new senate president, who at the time we were just on the Judiciary Committee together, and he was probably the smartest guy there, so it's not a surprise that he is now the State senate president; John Cullerton is here. So give them a big round of applause. Now, we have gone through as difficult and challenging 4 years as we've seen in not just a generation, but several generations. We had already seen a decade in which job growth had stagnated, jobs were being shipped overseas. The average wages and incomes of middle class families had actually gone down when you take inflation into account, even though the costs of everything from health care to a college education were going up. All of it culminated in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. And so we've spent the last 3 years trying to get things back on track, trying to right the ship, saving an auto industry that was on the brink of collapse, creating 4.5 million new jobs, half a million jobs in manufacturing, which is the highest rate that we've seen since the 1990s. Slowly, we've been trying to help the housing market recover. But the fact is, we've still got millions of people around the country who are struggling. We've still got folks who are out of work, folks who have lost their homes or their homes are under water, young people who still are trying to figure out how they can afford college, or if they've gone to college, aand what I try to remind people is that when we ran in 2008, our task was not simply to get back to where we were in 2007. Our job was to rebuild an economy where here in America, if you were willing to work hard and take responsibility for your own life, you could make it; where you could find a job that pays a living wage so you could pay the bills and support a family; where you could have a home that you would call your own, that you weren't bankrupt when you got sick and you could retire with dignity and respect; and most importantly, an economy in which you knew that you could get your kid a good education and your grandchild a good education and that they could dream bigger and do better than you ever imagined. That's what we've been fighting for. That's why we came together in 2008not just Democrats, but Independents and even some Republicansunderstanding that that basic bargain was at risk, the notion that here in America, everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody plays by the same set of rules. That's what we've been fighting for. And that's why, in addition to dealing with that immediate aftermath of this economic crisis, we also said, let's do something about health care, and let's make sure that everybody who is out there working hard and doing the right thing, that they're not going to go bankrupt because they get sick, that they're going to have health care they can count on. And we got that done. That's why we set out to reform Wall Street, because we believe that we've got to have a dynamic, vibrant financial sector, but we want the financial sector to do what it's supposed to be doing, which is financing businesses and families and growing an economy, not just making reckless bets. And we got that done with Wall Street reform. That's why we took on the student loan system and said that instead of having $60 billion going to banks as middlemen on the student loan programs, let's have that money go directly to students so that millions more young people could benefit from Pell grants and lower student loan rates, because we've got to make sure that they've got those ladders of opportunity. And we got that done. That's why we said we need to end the war in Iraq, because it was time to do some nation-building here at home and it would allow us to refocus our attention on going after Al Qaida and bin Laden. And we got that done. So our goal has never been just to get back to the precrisis situation. Our goal has been to build an economy that lasts for the long haul, for our kids and for our grandkids. That work is not yet finished. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America. Now, we have as stark a choice in this election as we've seen in my lifetime. In some ways, it's starker than it was in 2008. The Republican nominee, Mr. Romney, and his new running mate, Congressman Ryan, their basic idea is that what's holding us back is not banks that take reckless risks or insurance companies that are taking advantage of consumers or the fact that we've still got a global economic crisis that we're digging our way out of. Their view is that if we give tax cuts to the wealthiest Americans and we get rid of all kinds of regulationsregulations that help make sure that our air is clean and our water is clean, regulations that we've put in place to protect consumers from unscrupulous lenders, regulations that we've put in place to make sure that women are getting equal pay for equal work, regulations to protect workers and consumersthat somehow if we get rid of that stuff, then somehow the economy is going to thrive and prosperity will trickle down on everybody. Now, the problem is we tried it for a decade and it did not work. They have tried to sell this top-down, tax cut fairy dust before. [Laughter] And it did not work. But that's their theory, and you see it most prominently in how they would tackle the debt and the deficit. We've got a real problem with our debt and our deficit. It is a medium- and long-term problem. And what I've said is let's go forward with a balanced approach to reduce our deficit, getting rid of spending that we don't need, but still making investments in education, still making investments in basic research, still making investments in rebuilding our roads and our bridges. Let's make sure that we still have a strong Medicare and Social Security system and make sure that the most vulnerable among us are cared for. But their idea is, let's have another $5 trillion tax cut on top of the Bush tax cuts, even if it means gutting education investment, even if it means we're not rebuilding America, even if it means voucherizing our Medicare system, even if it means that we are weakening the safety net. And this $5 trillion tax cut is not to lower our deficit. It's not to help invest in America. This $5 trillion tax cut would be used basically to give folks like me or Mr. Romney an additional $100,000, $200,000, million dollars that we don't need and would probably be hard pressed to spend. [Laughter] So what makes it worse is the analysis that's already been done by not my office, by independent economists and folks who evaluate tax plans for a living: The only way to actually cut taxes $5 trillion more on top of the Bush tax cuts would be to ask middle class families to pay an average of $2,000 more to play for my tax cut or Mr. Romney's tax cut. Now, that can't be a theory that is designed to promote an economy that lasts. That's not something that is going to help young people who are struggling to pay for college get to where they want to go. That's not the kind of approach that historically made America an economic powerhouse, made us the envy of the world. I've got a different theory. I believe that we grow best not from the top down, but from the middle out, that we grow best when we create ladders of opportunity so that everybody can succeed, no matter what they look like, no matter where they come from, no matter what their last name is. And we've got evidence that my approach of deficit reductiona balanced approach of spending cuts and asking folks who can afford it to pay a little bit more and go back to the Clinton tax ratesthe last time we did this we created 23 million new jobs, went from deficit to surplus, and by the way, folks at the top did very well also. What happens is when teachers and construction workers and receptionists and ordinary folks, when they've got a little extra money to spend, they spend it. [Laughter] They maybe get rid of the old beater and buy a new car. They go out and buy a new appliance. Maybe they go to a restaurant. Heaven forbid they take a vacation once in a while. And that means businesses have more customers and they hire more workers. And we get a virtuous cycle. That's how we have built our economy, historically. And that's an example of what is at stake in this election. That's the choice, and it couldn't be starker. This is not an election between two candidates or two parties. This is a choice between two fundamentally different visions about America and how we move forward. Now, how we deal with our fiscal challenges, that's just one example. But across the board, there's a stark choice. I believe we should give tax breaks to companies that are investing here in the United States. Mr. Romney wants to continue to give tax breaks to companies that ship jobs overseas. I think that's the wrong way to go. And when we saved the auto industry, Mr. Romney said let's ""let Detroit go bankrupt."" I said let's bet on American workers. And now the American auto industry has come roaring back. And I believe that manufacturing can come roaring back here in America if we make good choices. Mr. Romney says, ""My top prioritythe first thing I'll do is kill Obamacare."" Well, let me say this. We've got 6.5 million young people already who have got health insurance on their parent's plan because of Obamacare. Seniors are paying lower prescription drug costs now because of Obamacare. Children with preexisting conditions can't be refused insurance because of Obamacare. And soon, all adults will be able to get health insurance even if they've got a preexisting condition, because of Obamacare. We've got preventive care for everybody. Insurances can't drop you. And women are having more control over their health care choices. That was the right thing to do. We're not going backwards. We're going forward. Mr. Romney, his plan for strengthening our housing market is just let the thing bottom out, let foreclosures bottom out. That's not a solution. What we've said is let's let families whose homes are under water, let's let them refinance at historically low rates and put an extra $3,000 in their pocket. And that can help them build up equity, strengthen the housing market, circulate in the economy. That's a choice in this election. I said ""don't ask, don't tell"" was the wrong thing to do. And we ended ""don't ask, don't tell."" Mr. Romney disagrees. That's a choice in this election. Mr. Romney says that it was a mistake to set a timetable to get our troops out of Afghanistan. I think after a decade of war, it's time to help Afghans take responsibility for security in their own nation. That's a choice in this election. Helping the children of immigrants who have grown up in this country, lived in this country, are Americans in everything except having some papersnot sending them to countries they, in many cases, they've never even been, but embracing them and giving an opportunity to put a stake down here in the country that they lovedthat was the right thing to do. Mr. Romney has got another idea. That's a choice in this election. So on almost every issuewhether it's clean energy where we've doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars, doubled clean energy, created jobs around the country, we can create moreMr. Romney has got a different view. On student loans, Mr. Romney says kids, they should just borrow money from their parents, not realizing perhaps that some kids might not have parents whom they can borrow money from. That's a different point of view. It is a different vision about how America should work. And in all these choices, what's at stake is whether or not we're going to continue to be a country where everybody has got a shot, where we're building a strong middle class, where the story of someone like me, raised by a single mom, who can become the President of the United States, and a young girl who grew up just a couple of miles from here, down in South Shore, whose dad had a blue collar and mom worked as a secretary, can end up as the First Lady of the United States, I want to keep that story alive for America. I don't want that story to stop now. That's what's at stake in this election. Now, this is going to be a close election. It's going to be close because there are a lot of folks still hurting out there and a lot of folks still feeling anxious. And as President of the United States, these things happen on my watch, and I've got responsibilities. And the other side will spend more money than ever just trying to deliver the message over and over again that the economy is still not where it needs to be and it's Obama's fault. That's going to be their message. And they're spending more money than we've ever seen in our history, trying to deliver that message. It's not a plan to create jobs or revive the middle class, but it's a plan to win the election. And it oftentimes feeds into the fear people have, but also the cynicism that folks have. But here's the good news. You guys taught me that no matter how bad we may be outspent, no matter how much we may sometimes be counted out, when the American people focus in on the values that we hold most dear, when we focus on what's best in us, when we remember the story of our own familiesour parents and our grandparents, great-grandparents, some who came here as immigrants, some who came here in chains, folks who went through hardships we can't even imagine, but somehow said to themselves, you know what, I may just have a low-paying job right now, but I can imagine if I work hard maybe my child will own a business some day; I may not be able to go to college, but I can imagine some day my child going to collegethat persistence and resilience and grit and hopefulness and optimism that says we are not bound by the circumstances of our birth, we can shape our own destiny: When the American people focus on that, then amazing things happen. That's what we saw in 2008: that spirit coming to the fore. And as tough as things have been, that spirit is still out there all across America. I see it every single day. We just have to make sure that we're fighting for it. I used to say back in 2008and I didn't have to tell you guys because a lot of you all have known me for a long timeI'm not a perfect man, and I said I wouldn't be a perfect President. But I promised you that I'd always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you where I stood, and I would wake up every single day thinking about you and fighting as hard as I knew how to make your lives a little bit better. Because in your stories, I saw my own. In your grandparents, I saw my grandparents, and in your kids, I saw Malia and Sasha. And I've kept that promise: Every single day, I've been thinking about you. And I still believe in you. And if you still believe in me and are willing to fight with me and knock on doors with me and make phone calls with me, if you are as determined as I am to keep bringing about hope and keep bringing about change, if you're ready to finish what we started in 2008, we will not lose this election. We will keep going forward. We won't go backwards. And we'll remind the world why the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth. Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.",2008,obama
"Hello, everybody! Well, first of all, welcome to my house. [Laughter] I have to say that the lawn hasn't looked this good in a while. [Laughter] But I figuredat least Michelle figuredthat if company was coming over, we'd better neaten up a little bit. [Laughter] It is wonderful to be back home. And it is wonderful to be among both old friends and new friends. There are some folks here who have known me since I first got out of law school. And not only did I not have any gray hair[laughter]but I think I barely owned a suit, because back then I was working here on the South Side of Chicago in a lot of low-income communities, trying to help folks help themselves. And it was challenging. We had some successes; we probably had more failures. But this place is where I learned about the importance of bringing communities together to solve problems. And this is also the place that produced my wife. And so although I'm not born and bred South Side of Chicago, I think it's fair to say that I'm now an adopted son of the South Side of Chicago. This is home. And to all the people who are here who helped me along the way, I just want to say it's wonderful to see all of you. I don't want to give a long speech because I want to save a little time to respond to some questions. But every election, Presidents or candidates will say, ""This is the most important election of my lifetime."" This is the most important election of my lifetime. [Laughter] It's more important than 2008 in a lot of ways, because in 2008, there was a sense that although we were entering into the worst financial crisis and economic crisis that we'd seen since the Great Depression, there did still seem to be some overlap between the parties in terms of the things that we need to get done to ensure opportunity for the next generation. My opponent, John McCain, believed in immigration reform, believed in campaign finance reform, believed in climate change. And we might have disagreed in terms of how to solve the problems, but there was a conversation going on, and there were some rough agreement about the facts. That's not so much the case now. You have a stark choiceas stark as we've seen in a generation at leastbetween two fundamentally different visions about how we move this country forward. On the one hand, Mr. Romney, and now his running mate, Paul Ryan, fundamentally believe that if folks at the top are doing well and we eliminate regulations that help on clean air and clean water and help to constrain how an insurance company operates or increased transparency on Wall Street, that somehow prosperity will come roaring back and will trickle down to everybody. I believe that the way we grow this economy is to make sure that we've got a strong middle class and we continue to have ladders for people to get into the middle class. And that means, even as we control Government spending and we make sure that every taxpayer dollar that does come in is wisely spent, that we're also investing in things like education and making college more affordable, in our infrastructure, in research and development, in an energy policy that frees ourselves from dependence on foreign oil. And that vision is one that is supported by the record. I mean, this argument is one in which we can actually look at evidence. We tried the approach that the other side is promoting for about a decade, and it resulted in the most sluggish job growth, incomes and wages going down relative to inflation, and culminated in a complete economic disaster. The approach that I'm talking about we tried under Bill Clinton, and we created 23 million new jobs, and we went from deficits to surplus. And by the way, those of us who've been blessed by this country and have enjoyed enormous success, we did pretty well under that system too. Because it turns out that when teachers and construction workers and receptionists and firefighters, when they're doing well, then they've got money to spend, and businesses have customers, and the entire economy grows. Now, there are going to be a whole host of other issues in which the arguments are almost as stark. I believe that women should have control over their health care choices. Mr. Romney and Mr. Ryan have a different view. I believe it was right to end ""don't ask, don't tell"" and let anybody who loves this country fight for this country. Mr. Romney and Mr. Ryan have a different view. I believe in investing in clean energy, that we shouldn't just restrict our energy approach to fossil fuels. Mr. Romney and Congressman Ryan have a different view. On international policy, I think ending the war in Iraq was the right thing to do. Governor Romney disagrees. And so across the board, we're going to have a wide range of arguments. But this issue about how we grow an economy in which everybody has a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same set of rules, the argument about how we reduce our deficit and our debt in a way that allows us to still pass on to the next generation greater opportunity, that's going to be at the heart of this campaign. That's what the American people are going to be paying the most attention to. And that's an argument I'm confident we can win. But we can only win it because of you, because of the enormous support and effort and sacrifice that all of you have been willing to make. And so, on behalf of Michelle and myself, I want to thank you. But I also want to warn you this is going to be a close election. We've got 86 days left. Now is not the time to get weary, now is the time to double down. I heard from a couple folks who said they'd been really excited by the Olympics, and I just want to remind you this is not going to be a race like Usain Bolt, where we're[laughter]like, 40 yards ahead and we can just kind of start jogging 10 feet before the finish line. We're going to have to run through the tape. But we're really well positioned to not just win, but also keep America moving forward. And I'll just end with this quick story; it's appropriate for Chicago. Some of you know a dear friend of mine, he's a friend of some of yours: Ab Mikva. Ab actually got started as a politician here. He was part of the reformist movement back in the days when the machine in Chicago was still very strong, and Ab was a young, idealistic congressional candidate. And there's a famous story where he went to the ward committeeman in this area and said: ""Look, I'd like to get involved in politics. I've got a lot of good ideas. I'd like to run."" And the committeeman said, ""Who sent you?"" And Ab Mikva said, ""Nobody sent me."" And the committeeman looked at him, he said, ""We don't want nobody nobody sent."" [Laughter] I know who sent me. You guys sent me. Andwhich brings me to the other story Ab likes to tell, which is that being friends with a politician is a little bit like perpetually having a child in college[laughter]because every so often you've got to write a big check. The good news is, I'm about to graduate. [Laughter] So this will be my last campaign. If everybody is willing to work hard, given the big investment you've already made, make sure I graduate here, that I get another 4 years. Thank you very much, everybody.",2008,obama
"Thank you! Thank you, everybody. It's good to see you guys. Thank you. Everybody, please have a seat. Now, let me first of all thank Michael and David Stern, who are both here, as well as all the NBA players who are here. We are so grateful to them. To all my outstanding supporters who are here, thank you. I want to acknowledge an outstanding basketball player in his own right, the Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan. Some of you have had a chance to see his game. We've got some legendary Knicks in the house. Clyde Walt Frazier is here. And in addition to being one of the best basketball players of all time, also one of the finest public servants we've ever had, Bill Bradley is here. So this is my Dream Team. I have to say, first of all, it is very rare that I come to an event where I'm like the fifth or sixth most interesting person. [Laughter] Usually, the folks want to take a picture with or sit next to me or talk to me. That has not been the case at this event, and I completely understand it. Secondly, I want all of you to know that although Michael looked very elegant in his suit, he has North Carolina shorts underneath there. [Laughter] I think that's important to note. Right, Vince? You've got some too, don't you? There he is. We got some Tar Heels in the house. To all of you, I just want to say thank you. And I'm not going to speak long because I'm going to have a chance to take some pictures with everybody and say thank you personally. The country has obviously gone through one of the toughest times that we've seen in our lifetimes. In fact, as I look around the room, I don't see anybody who was around during the Great Depression. And[laughter]no, I don't believe it. You look too good. [Laughter] You look too good. And so a lot of folks have been hurting. We have seen people lose their homes, lose their jobs, lose their savings. And for the last 3 years, as President, my job has been to right the ship and not only try to bring about an economic recovery, but also to start dealing with some of the challenges that got us into this mess in the first place, because we had been going for a decade in which people's incomes and wages had flatlined, in which folks like those of us in this room had done very well, but the vast majority of folks were working harder for less at the same time as their cost for health care and the cost for sending their kids to college kept on going up. We had run two wars on a credit card and, as a consequence, had gone from surplus to deficit. And then it all culminated in this massive financial crisis that left enormous destruction in its wake. And so for the last 3 years, every morning I wake up and I say to myself, what is it that we can do to make sure that we're building a strong middle class and we're creating ladders of opportunity for folks who are willing to work hard to get into that middle class. The basic security that says if you're willing to work hard, you can get a job that pays a living wage, that you can own a home that you call your own, that you won't go bankrupt when you get sick, that you can save and retire with some dignity and some respect, and most importantly, that you're going to be able to ensure that even if your kids don't have a 44-inch vertical, that they can aspire to do things that you didn't even dream of, that they can go further than you did. And we've started making progress down that front. Over the last 3 years, we've created 4.5 million new jobs. We saved an auto industry that was on the brink of destruction. We've been able to provide health insurance for 30 million Americans who didn't have it before, even though they were working really hard, and lower prescription drug costs for seniors who oftentimes have to choose between whether they're going to eat or whether they buy the medicines they need to stay well. We've been able to provide millions of young people additional grants and loans so that they can go to college. And we've been able to end a war and start transitioning out of another one and, at the same time, provide our men and women in uniform the kind of support that they have earned, because somebody who has fought for us and risked their lives for us shouldn't have to fight for a job or a roof over their heads when they come home. So the good news is we've made progress. The challenge is that we've got a lot more work to do, and we're now in the middle of a campaign that will determine not just our futures, but the futures of our kids and our grandkids. This is probably the most consequential election of my lifetime, and in a lot of ways, it's more consequential than the one in 2008. Back in 2008, there was a lot at stake, and obviously, there was huge excitement around the election, and it was kind of trendy to be a supporter of Obama. People didn'tfolks who hadn't followed politics before, they started getting involved, just like nonbasketball fans started watching the Chicago Bulls back in the '90s. [Laughter] But back in 2008, we were running against a Republican candidate who believed in some basic things that I believe in: believed that money shouldn't dominate politics; believed in immigration reform, that we should give every young person who's here a chance to become an American and contribute to this country; somebody who believed in climate change and believed in science. Now we've got a Republican Party that has gone so far to the extreme that it becomes very hard for us to see Washington get anything done. So Mr. Romney, my opponent, his main economic plan is to give everybody in this room a tax cut. Now, some of you may find that appealing, but the fact of the matter is that we can't afford it. We can't afford $5 trillion, much of which would go to folks like us, and to pay for it, we would end up gutting our investments in education, gutting our investments in health care for people who really need it, gutting our investments in science and technology that have always made us an economic superpower, gutting our investments in infrastructureroads, bridges, airportsthe things that help businesses succeed in this country, and impose additional costs on middle class families that can barely afford it right now. That's his essential plan. I was just in Las Vegas talking to a group of teachersand before a big rally I met with three teachers, and they explained to me that right now they have an average of 38 kids in their classroom. Some classes end up having 45 kids. They don't have enough desks, so kids are sitting on the floor at the beginning of the school year. The books they use date back to 2003. So I was talking to a civics teacher who was explaining, ""I'm having to explain to kids that some of the countries in the books don't exist anymore."" And that's not unusual in big chunks of the country. And this is at a time when our economic success entirely depends on how well we educate our kids, how well we prepare our workforce, because companies can locate anywhere. And if they don't have a place where they can count on people having the skills they need, they'll go to China, they'll go to India, they'll go to Eastern Europe. And that can't be the kind of future that we want for America. So we've got major economic debates. That's not the only place where we've got debates. Recently, some of you have been paying attention to the commentary of the Senator of Missouri, Mr. Akin, whothe interesting thing here is that this is an individual who sits on the House Committee on Science and Technology, but somehow missed science class. [Laughter] But it's representative of a desire to go backwards instead of forwards and to fight fights that we thought were settled 20, 30 years ago. When it comes to how we deal with other countries, I'm very proud that America is stronger and more respected around the world. And we sawsome of you were at the London OlympicsCarmelo and some other folks were there andway to bring home the gold. We appreciate that. But our alliances are stronger now because people around the world feel that America doesn't just lead with our military, although we take great pride in the strength and power of our military, but we also lead with our ideas. And we also lead in our diplomacy, and we try to bring people together, to collaborate to solve major problems around the world. And the other side has a different idea when it comes to how we're going to approach those issues. On energy, one of the things I'm most proud of is the fact that we've actually reduced our dependence on foreign oil below 50 percent for the first time in 13 years. And we keep on going down. Oil production is up. Natural gas is up. But we're also doubling the energy that we get from wind and solar; that is clean, it's renewable, it's homegrown, it's creating jobs all across America. Mr. Romney, he wants to eliminate the key support that is going to allow us to grab our energy future. That is not the kind of future that we want for our kids. So there is a lot at stake in this election. And perhaps most importantly, what's at stake is whether or not America continues to be a place where if you work hard, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter what your last name is, you can succeed. You can make it. That's what makes America special. That's the reason why people continue to want to come here from all around the world, because they have this sense of America as an example for the rest of the world of freedom and opportunity and democracy, not something that's bought by a bunch of wealthy individuals just writing $10 million checks. Not opportunity that's just restricted to the few, but opportunity to the many. And a lot of people in this room come from humble beginnings. Many of you guys have achieved pinnacles of success that your parents, your grandparents, your great-grandparents could have never imagined. But the reason you had that chance was because here in this country, they could project. Even in the midst of hardship, even in the midst of hard times, they could say to themselves, you know what, maybe I can't own a business, but my son or daughter, they can own a business. Maybe I never went to college and I'm sweeping floors, but some day I can imagine my grandchild teaching at that university where I sweep floors. Maybe I can't afford a lawyer, but maybe some day my son or daughter might be a Supreme Court Justice. That idea is what America has always been about. And that's what's at stake in this election. Because if we continue down a path where only a few of us are doing very well, our kids will be fine in the short term, our grandkids will be all right, but over time, the essence of what has made this country great erodes. And that's not something I'm willing to accept. That's something we have to fight for. So I'm going to need all of you on this team and working hard for the next 11 weeks. I can't resist a basketball analogy[laughter]we are in the fourth quarter[laughter]we're up by a few points, but the other side is coming strong, and they play a little dirty. [Laughter] We've got a few folks on our team in foul trouble. [Laughter] We've got a couple of injuries. [Laughter] And I believe that they've got one last run in them, and I'd say there's about 7 minutes to go in the game. And Michael's competitiveness is legendary, and nobody knows better than Michael that if you've got a little bit of lead and there's about 7 minutes to go, that's when you put them away. That's when you stop any momentum they have. You don't let them up from the mat. You don't give them any hope that they might pull this out. You don't leave it to a lucky shot they might make from half-court at the end. You go ahead and you pour it on. You might press them a little bit. You might put Pippen and Jordan on the front court, trap them a little bit, have Horace come in. You don't let up. That's how the Bulls won six. That's how we're going to win this election. Thank you very much, everybody. Appreciate you guys. God bless you, and God bless America.",2008,obama
"Hello, everybody! Hello! Hello, New York! Thank you. Thank you so much. If you have a chair, go ahead and use it. If you don't, don't. [Laughter] It is wonderfulhey, guys, good to see you. It is wonderful to be with all of you. I just had a chance to take some pictures with you, and I have to tell you they all turned out wonderfully. [Laughter] I mean this is a good-looking group, very photogenic. Yes, you especially. [Laughter] It's wonderful to be here. We've got some people who've supported me since I actually ran for Senate in this ballroom. And then we've got some folks who supported us in '08, and then we've got some new friends. And to all of you, I just want to say how grateful I am and how wonderful it is to be back in New York. Now, we just came off two conventions, one in Tampa and one in Charlotte. And Michelle Obama was pretty good, you know? And then you had Bill Clinton, who somebody said should be secretary of explaining stuff. [Laughter] And what was striking, I think, coming out of those two conventions was the clarity about how important this choice is. Seven weeks from today, we're going to be making a decision about the future of our country. And a lot of you brought your kids here today. [At this point, a baby cried.] Yes, right on cue. [Laughter] And that is entirely appropriate, because the decisions that we're going to make in this election are going to have an impact not just on us, it's going to have an impact on them and their kids for decades to come. [The baby cried again] It's true. [Laughter] The fact is that on almost every issue, we have a deep difference not just between two candidates or two political parties, but a deep difference in terms of how we think about growing our economy and how we think about what ensures prosperity and security over the long term. The other side, they have their convention, and they talked a lot about what they think is wrong with the country, but they didn't really tell you much about how they'd make it right. They asked for your vote, but they didn't really have a plan. And the reason they didn't want to talk about their plan much was because the plan they're offering is the same one they've offered for the last 30 years, which is if we give a lot of tax cuts, particularly skewed towards people who really don't need tax cuts, and if we roll back regulations on clean air and we roll back regulations on consumer protection and we roll back regulations that ensure that insurance companies treat you properly, that somehow America's energy will be unleashed and the economy will be going gangbusters. And what they're counting on is an element of amnesia, because that's exactly what we tried from 2001 to 2008, during which we experienced the slowest job growth in 50 years. We went from surpluses to deficits. Ordinary families actually saw their average incomes go down, and it culminated in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depressionso not a real good track record in terms of the plan that they are presenting. We've got a different vision, and our vision says that our economy grows best and our children's futures are best secured when we recognize that we're all in this together; that we believe in a free-market system and individual initiative and hard work, but we also believe in this basic bargain that says if you work hard, you can make it in this country. Everybody, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter what last name you have, no matter who you love, here in America, you can make it you try, and that there are important ways in which we can ensure that everybody has access to opportunity. So what I tried to do at the convention was lay out very specifically how I think we're going to get there. Over the last 3 years, we've created 4.5 million new jobs, half a million of them in manufacturing. So what I said was, let's double down and make sure that we're exporting more and outsourcing fewer jobs. Let's develop exports markets all around the world, and let's make sure that we're investing in things like clean energy so that we're building wind turbines and long-lasting batteries and all the cutting-edge technologies that ensure we keep at the cutting edge of this global economy. And then I talked about education and how all the work we've done to reform schools is starting to bear fruit. But we've also got to make sure that every young person in this country can afford a college education and make sure that they're not loaded up with debt when they get out, so that they can potentially become teachers or go into the Foreign Service or do something that may not pay a lot of money, but is vitally important to our country. I talked about how important it was for us to have an energy policy that ensures that we have high production of traditional fuels like oil and natural gas, but that we're also investing in clean energy. We've doubled fuel efficiency on cars. We have doubled our production of clean energy. That's creating thousands of jobs. It's taking carbon out of our atmosphere. And it is freeing ourselves from dependence on foreign oil. We've actually reduced our dependenceour oil imports every year that I've been in office, and we now have it below 50 percent. And we think we can cut that in half by 2020, but only if we pursue the kinds of energy sources that are good for our economy and potentially can help save the planet. And I also talked about how, if we're going to be serious about reducing our deficits, that we've got to cut out spending that we don't need, that's not helping us grow. But we can't just gut our investment in education or our investments in science and research or our investments in making sure that young people can go to college, just to pay for tax cuts for folks like methat we're going to have to take a balanced approach. That means that those of us who have been incredibly blessed by this country, we can afford to do a little bit more. Now, that's a very different agenda than a $5 trillion tax cut that's paid for by gutting education, gutting Medicaid, and turning Medicare into a voucher system. It's a different philosophy about how we grow our economy. And I believe that we grow our economy from the middle out and by providing ladders of opportunity for everybody. And when we do, everybody does better. When Bill Clinton was President, we created 23 million new jobs, had a surplus instead of a deficit, and we produced a whole lot more millionaires than we've produced under this other theory, because suddenly businesses had customers and had more profits, and we got a virtuous cycle that continued in the longest post-World War II boom in American history. And we can replicate that, even in this competitive environment, but we've got to be smart about it. Now, a lot of you here obviously recognize that those aren't the only choices involved. We've got choices about war and peace. I ended the war in Iraq, as I promised. We are transitioning out of Afghanistan. We have gone after the terrorists who actually attacked us 9/11 and decimated Al Qaida. Mr. Romney thinks that we should have stayed in Iraq, indicated that it was a ""tragic"" mistake for us to have gotten out of Iraq; still hasn't made clear what his plan would be for Afghanistan; wants to add $2 trillion to our defense budget for programs that our Joint Chiefs don't want. It's a fundamentally different view of how we project power and ensure our security around the world. On social issues, we did the right thing ending ""don't ask, don't tell."" I am absolutely certain, based on conversations with Michelle[laughter]that women are capable of making their own health care decisions. And the notion that we would have a constitutional amendment that would tell people who they could marryacross the board, there's just a different vision of who we are as a people. And I believe we are at our best, we are at our strongest, when we're including everybody, when everybody gets a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same rules. So I guess if you're here, I'm kind of preaching to the choir. [Laughter] I don't need to tell you that I think we're offering the better vision for our country. So let me just wrap up by saying a key issue is going to be, do we get this thing done? We've got 7 weeks. Seven weeks goes by fast, especially when you're out there campaigning. And the good news is that our ideas are better and they're more resonant with the American people. The bad news is that these folks have super PACs that are writing $10 million checks and have the capacity to just bury us under the kind of advertising that we've never seen before. And we've never seen something like this, so we don't know what impact it's going to have. And that means that we're going to have to work a little bit harder than the other side. It means that we have to have more volunteers. We have to have a better grassroots organization. It means the people who can write $25 checks or $50 checks or $100 checks or $1,000 checks, that's how we're going to be able to compete. We don't need to match these folks dollar for dollar. We can't. I mean, if somebody here has a $10 million check[laughter]I can't solicit it from you, but feel free to use it wisely. [Laughter] But that's not our game. Our game is grassroots. Our game is mobilizing numbers and passion and energy and focus and hope. That's who we are. And so I guess what I'd ask islook, I had a friend named Abner Mikva in Chicago. He was a Congressmanformer Congressman, former White House Counsel, and wonderful man. And Abner used to say that being friends with a politician is like perpetually having a kid in college[laughter]because every few months, you've got to write this big check. [Laughter] Well, the good news is I'm graduating. [Laughter] So this is my last race. But the stakes couldn't be higher, so we've got to leave it all on the field. I am asking everybody here to spend these next 7 weeks really focused on this election. You're already converted. Go out there and get your friends, get your neighbors involved. To the extent that you can ask them for contributions, ask them for their time, ask them for their votes, you are going to be the best ambassadors that we can have for this election. And if you are as determined and as energized as I am, if you believe that we've still got more good jobs to create and clean energy to generate and more troops to bring home and more vets to take care of and more doors of opportunity to open for everybody who's willing to work hard in this country, if you believe that we're all in this together, then I need you to get to work. Seven weeks. And I promise you, if you're putting everything you've got into this thing, we'll win this election and we will finish what we started. And we'll remind the world why the United States of America is the envy of the world. So thank you very much, everybody. God bless you. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Well, it is wonderful to see all of you. I'm so grateful for all your support. Let me just begin by saying to Jay and Bey, thank you so much for your friendship. We are so grateful. Michelle and Malia and Sasha are mad at me because they are not here. [Laughter] That doesn't usually happen. Usually they're like, we're glad you're goingwe don't need to go. But every time they get a chance to see these two they are thrilled, partly because they are just both so generous, particularly to my kids. And Malia and Sasha just love both of them. Beyonce couldn't be a better role model for our daughters because she carries herself with such class and poiseand has so much talent. And Jay-Z now knows what my life is like. [Laughter] We both have daughters, and our wives are more popular than we are. [Laughter] So we've got a little bond there. [Laughter] It's hard, but it's okay. It's okay. [Laughter] Forty-nine days until this election. We just came out of convention season, and we had two conventionsone in Tampa, and one in Charlotte. And I don't know that everybody here spent all their time watching conventions. I'm sure that many of you had better things to do. But you saw two very stark visions, different visions about where we need to take this country. I think everybody recognizes that America has all the ingredients we need for success. We've got the best workers in the world. We've got the best businesses in the world. We've got the most entrepreneurial culture in the world. We've got the best universities and scientists and researchers. We've got this incredible diversity of talent and innovation and ingenuity, which makes us the envy of the world. People come here from every corner of the globe because of that central idea at the heart of America, which says no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter what your last name is, no matter who you love, here in America you can make it if you work hard, if you try. All right, that's what inspires so many people, not just in this country, but around the world. But what we also recognize is that, that basic bargain has been eroding over the course of a decade. There are a lot of people who have been out there working really hard, and yet their paychecks haven't kept up with the costs of everything from gas to groceries to sending a kid to college. There are a lot of folks out there who take responsibility for their lives and their families and their communities and their neighborhoods, and yet it seems as if security is always a little bit out of reach. We've seen an economy over the last decade where jobs were being shipped overseas; an economy that was loaded up with debt; an economy where there was a lot of irresponsibility on the part of folks who should have known better. And it all culminated in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. And it was in that context that I was sworn into office almost 4 years ago, at a time when the banking system was melting down, at a time whenthe month I was sworn in, we lost 800,000 jobs, the worst crisis since the Great Depression. And we have worked tirelessly over the last 4 years to start turning that around, and we have made progress. So the last 30 months, we've seen the private sector create jobs every single month4.5 million jobs altogether. We've seen manufacturing start coming back. An auto industry that was on the brink of liquidation has come roaring back, so that now GM is once again on the top of the world and Chrysler is selling more cars than they've seen in a very, very long time. We've been able to make sure that small businesses survived and got help through the Small Business Administration. But what we tried to do was not just get back to where we were before the crisis. We tried to start addressing some of those issues that had been lingering for too long. That's what health carein a country like ours, we shouldn't have millions of people who are at risk of going bankrupt just because somebody in their family got sick. And that's why we passed a health care reform law that will provide millions of families the kind of security they need and also make sure that we're starting to bring down health care costs, so that we can afford it. That's the reason why we made sure that we changed our student loan system and our Pell grant system, so that young people have a chance to go to college even if they weren't born rich, that we understand if we make an investment in young people and they succeed, then all of us are going to be better off. It's the reason why we've invested in alternative energy, to make sure that instead of just relying on foreign oil, we're starting to build windmills and solar panels and putting people back to work here all across the countryand in the process also helping our national security and doing something about climate change. It's the reason why we ended a policy like ""don't ask, don't tell"" that somehow prevented outstanding people in our services to serve the country they love just because of who they love. It's the reason that we ended the war in Iraq and we're bringing the war in Afghanistan to a close. So we've made a lot of progress, but we've got so much more work to do. And the other side, they've got a different vision. You saw it at their convention. And their basic theory is that if you give tax cuts to folks at the very top, people like us who have been incredibly blessed and fortunate and, frankly, don't need a tax cut, that somehow the country is going to be better off. And the good thing about so many of us hereand I know, I speak for Jay and Beyis we remember what it's like not having anything, and we know people who were just as talented as us that didn't get the same break, the same chance. We remember some of our parents or grandparents who came here as immigrants and got a little bit of help along the way to go to that school or be able to start that first business. We understand thatas Michelle said as well as anybody couldthose of us who have been blessed with success and been able to walk through those doors of opportunity, we don't slam the door behind us. We prop it open. We make it easier for those who follow to succeed as well. And by doing that, our success is that much better. It's that much more stable and more secure, because when the whole country does well, everybody does well. When the middle class does well, and when teachers and firefighters and construction workers and receptionists and waiters and the folks who are cleaning up these big office buildings in Manhattan, if they're getting a decent wage and they're able to provide their kids a good education, the whole economy booms. That's been our history. That's who we are. And that's what's at stake in this election. Now, there are other things that are at stakewho gets seated on the Supreme Court? Are we going to allow ourselves to go back to a time when politicians in Washington are telling women how to make health care decisions? Michelle tells me you guys are actually quite capable of making those decisions by yourself. When it comes to issues of war and peace, my opponent says that me ending the war in Iraq was tragic. He hasn't been able to explain what his plan would be in terms of dealing with a situation like Afghanistan. And so, how we're perceived in the world and how we're able to project our power not just through our extraordinary military and what our outstanding troops do, but also through our diplomacy and our culture and our ideals and our valuesthe message that we're sending around the world, that is also at stake in this election. Whether or not we continue to stay focused on ensuring that college is affordable, and making sure that our air is clean and our water is clean, the air and water that our kids play in and breathethat's at stake in this election. So the stakes could not be higher. And I think most of you already understand that. Otherwise you wouldn't be here tonight. And then, so the question becomes how much are we willing to fight for this in the last 7 weeks? I think that there's a danger sometimes among Democrats, progressives, supporters of mine, to think we must be right on the issues so I'm sure the election will be fine. But that's not how elections work. Elections work because you put in the effort and the sweat and the passion and the energy to get out there and deliver a message to the American people. Because the American people are busy and they're focused on their kids and they're focused on getting to work or finding a job. And all this politics stuff sometimes seems very distant to them. And they're being inundated by more negative ads from the other side than we've ever seen in our history. We've got people writing $10 million checks just to see if they can beat me. And you see it, anybody who has been turning on the televisionyou don't see it in New York, because this isn't a swing state. [Laughter] But you try going to Ohio or Virginia right now and ad after ad is distorting my record or trying to persuade people as to why we need to change course and replace the occupant of the White House. So we can't be complacent. If all of you genuinely believe that the decisions that I've made and the vision that I'm projecting about the kind of America we want not just for ourselves, but for our kids and our grandkidsif you genuinely believe that, we're going to have to work for it. The other side is full of passion and they are working very hard to beat us. And in these next 7 weeks we're going to have to do everything that we can. And for some of you that means financial support; for others it may mean you're out there knocking on some doors or making some phone calls, or using your influence to persuade other people to get involved. But understand that this will not come easy, and that we're going to have to fight for this thing every step of the way. And that's always been the case. It's been interesting over the last 4 years, sometimes people ask me, how do you handle all the criticism and the media and the scrutiny and the pressure and this and that and the other. And I tell them there are two things that allow me to not just survive this but to thrive and enjoy it. The first is the American people. Because when you travel around the country, it turns out that they're so much better than the kind of politics we see in Washington. Most people are good, and they're decent, and they're trying to do the right thing. And they may not follow every issue and know exactly what is going on, but their basic instinct is let's give everybody a fair shot and let's make sure everybody does their fair share, and let's make sure everybody is playing by the same set of rules. And let's open up opportunity for everybody. That'syou go to a small town in Iowa, you go to a big city in Californiathat decency and goodness of the American people shines through. And that encourages me. That makes me feel good. Some of you sawI was just on Letterman before I came here, and some of you saw that he showed that picture of that pizza owner who picked me up[laughter]and lifted me up and kind of straightened out my back[laughter]well, this guy, he started his own pizza company and is a Republican, but is somebody who thought that I shared with him a passion for doing the right thing. And he started his own blood drive in the community that is now the largest blood drive in Florida, and is passionate about helping folks who haven't had a chance, and wants to make sure that they succeed. And so when I hear people trying to label folks as, well, these are Republicans, or these are Democrats, or these are people who don't understand the countrywhen I hear those divisions, I say, well, you're not paying attention to what's going on in the country. There's a lot of good out there. So that keeps me energized and inspired. And the second thing is an awareness of history and an understanding that change in this country has never been easy. It's never been easy. Women getting the right to vote took decades of work. The civil rights movementwe had a century of work. The union movement, people having an opportunity to get a minimum wagepeople were beaten and died for that. So I'm always reminded and humbled by the fact that what we do at any given moment is just part of this bigger pattern, part of God's plan, part of a process. And our job is just to make sure that we are pushing in the right directionpushing the wheel of history in the right direction. And hopefully, then our kids will be equipped and have the privilege to keep pushing in the right direction in the future. So I don't want people to be complacent, but I also don't want people to be discouraged. We're on the brink of an election, but more importantly, we're on the brink of moving America in a direction in which we're going to be more just, more fair, the economy is going to grow in a way that includes everybodyan America that's respected around the world because we are putting forward our best values and our best ideals. And you're a part of that. Being here tonight, you're a part of that. You're a part of us trying to make some more history. And we've made history in the past; we're going to make some more history over the next seven weeks as long as you guys are ready to keep going with me. All right? So thank you so much, everybody. God bless you. Appreciate you. Bey, Jay, thank you.",2008,obama
"Hello, everybody! It is so good to see all of you, and I'm going to have a chance to, I know, take some pictures and spend a little time with you. But let me begin by thanking Eddie Vedder for that unbelievable performance, but more importantly, for that story, which is the first time I've ever heard that story. And for you to share that with us, Eddie, I think speaks volumes not just about you and who you are, but it also speaks volumes about our country, because that story, I think, captures better than anything what this campaign is about and what this country is about. At any given moment, all of us may have challenges. At any given moment, all of us may need a helping hand. And that's not inconsistent with individual initiative and risk-taking and pursuing the American Dream. It's part and parcel of it. And so I'm so grateful for your friendship and your support, but I'm really grateful for you sharing that story with all of us. Thank you. To Lisa and Don, thank you for opening up your extraordinary home. We are so grateful. I want to thank Tyler Florence for all the outstanding food. And I want to acknowledge your former Governor, a great friendand I can admit it nowCharlie Crist. I'm allowed to hug him as much as I want. [Laughter] We are less than 50 days away from the election. And this is my last election, so I get nostalgic sometimes thinking about all my previous races. And my first race where Michelle and I would go door to door with these xeroxedwe'd gone to Kinko's and we kind of printed up these little hand cards. And people would look and say, what name is this? [Laughter] And they couldn't pronounce it, and people wouldn't answer the door. And the campaign was run out of our kitchen in a small condo in Chicago. And obviously now, things have changed. Our budget is a little bit bigger. Our mode of transportas opposed to me driving around with one staff person in the passenger sea and unfolding maps and trying to figure out where I'm supposed to go and trying to find a parking spot and getting there and it turns out it's raining and I don't have an umbrella and so I walk into people's houses soakedthings are a little smoother for me now, I've got to admit. [Laughter] But the motivation, the reason that I'm running now is no different from that first race, and it's no different than the sentiment that Eddie just expressed up here on stage. Because, like him, I've traveled the long way, but it's been an unlikely journey, and the reason that I'm here is because this country, alone among any other country on Earth, is able to pluck the son of a single mom, without fame, without fortune, without resources, without connections, and give him the kind of education and doors of opportunity that allowed me, as long as I was willing to work hard and make some sacrifices, to make something of myself. And the same is true for Michelle. And the same is true for a number of you. And so what's at stake, when I think about this election, is preserving or restoring that basic bargain here in America that says if you work hard, if you meet your responsibilities and if you've got some big dreams, you've got a chance to succeed. You may not succeed and become a rock 'n' roll star. [Laughter] But you've got a chance to have a home and raise a family and not go bankrupt when you get sick and contribute to your community, and most importantly, give your kids an even better chance to do better and dream bigger than you did. And for a decade or so, it felt as if that dream was slipping away. We had seen jobs shipped overseas so that the traditional path for a lot of folks into the middle class through manufacturing jobs, that was gone. You saw incomes flatline or go down and the costs of everything from health care to college going up, people having to take on more and more debt just to keep up, and then eventually the house of cards collapsing in the worst recession since the Great Depression. And I ran for President because that's not the story I tell myself about who we are as a nation. I still believe in that story that Eddie described, and that my own life exemplifies. And so for the last three and a half years, everything we've done is been focused on how do we grow this economy so that everybody has got a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share and everybody is playing by the same rules and we're growing a strong middle class, not from the top down, but from the middle out and from the bottom up. And it's because of the resilience of the American people and the policies that we've put in place that we've been able to turn around a situation where we were losing 800,000 jobs a month and now have seen 30 consecutive months of job growth. It's for that reason. It's for that reason that we've been able to provide millions of students greater assistance for them to go to collegenot just four-year colleges, but also community colleges so that they can get trained for the jobs that are hiring right now. It's for that reason that we said it's time for us to do something about health care in this country. When we've got tens of millions of people who are at risk of going bankrupt just because somebody in their family gets sickthat's something we can change. It's for that reason that we passed Wall Street reform, so that not only do we no longer see taxpayer-funded bailouts, but we also start seeing consumers protected from unscrupulous mortgage brokers or payday lenders, and people have a sense that they're not going to be cheated when they go into the marketplace. It's for that reason that we've been able to double our fuel-efficiency standards on cars, and cut our imports of oil and begin to double our clean energy. All these things are of a piece, because all these things are designed to try to make our economy strong and create a foundation so that, once again, anybody who works hard can make it here in this country. Now, we've got a lot more work to do, and everybody here knows it, and certainly folks here in Florida understand that. We've got a lot of people who are still looking for work, a lot of people whose homes are still under water. We've got communities that are struggling and storefronts that are still boarded up. And that's why this election becomes so important; not only is our work not done, but we've got as fundamental a choice as I've seen since I've been following politics; between two different candidates, two different parties, but also, most importantly, two different visions of how we move forward. Governor Romney and his allies in Congress think that the solution, the way we provide strong growth and opportunity, is to provide tax cuts for folks like you. [Laughter] And, listen, I understand nobody likes paying taxes, but that recipe we tried: We tried for a decade, and it worked very well for us, but it didn't work well for the country. The other big idea that they've got is to roll back regulations that keep our air and water clean; roll back regulations that make sure that people aren't abused in the marketplace. We tried that too, and it didn't work very well. So we've got a different idea, and what I tried to do at the conventionI know there was one here; we had another one in Charlotte. Maybe you saw both of them. What we've said is: let's focus on how we continue to build an economy that works for middle class families and everybody who's striving to get into that middle class. How do we make sure we're providing tax breaks to companies that are investing here in Florida, here in the United States, instead of giving tax breaks to companies that are shipping jobs overseas; how do we make sure that educational opportunity works for everybody, that college is accessible, that we're hiring outstanding teachers in math and science, that we're investing in early childhood education. How do we make sure that we're developing oil and gas resources, but we're also investing in clean energy like wind and solar that can cut our carbon, reduce our dependence on foreign oil, and is good for people's pocketbooks; and how do we reduce our deficit in a balanced way, cutting out programs that don't work. And for those of you who are Democrats, I have to confess that not every program works in Washington, and we can trim back and streamline and make Government more efficientin fact, we have an obligation to do sobut even after we make those cuts, if we're serious about deficit reduction, we're then also going to have to ask folks who've done very well to do a little bit more and go back to the rates we had when Bill Clinton was Presidentwhich is a time, by the way, when we created 23 million new jobs, a surplus instead of a deficit, and actually created a whole lot of millionaires to boot. Because it turns out that when you've got middle class families doing well, guess whatthey spend money. They buy cars and computers andI was going to say CDs, but I'm dating myself. [Laughter] And then businesses have more profits and they hire more people, and we get into a virtuous cycle and everybody does better. Now, at the same time as we're focused domestically, we've got some stuff internationally, obviously, that's going on. And this past week reminded us of the challenges and the threats that are still out there. I said I'd end the war in Iraq, and we did. I said we would begin winding down our commitments in Afghanistan and make sure that Afghans are taking responsibility for their own security, and that process has begun. I said we'd go after Al Qaida and bin Laden, and we did that. But we're not done yet. We're still threatened by an Iran that is pursuing nuclear weapons, and I've been absolutely clear that our policy is not to allow Iran to get a nuclear weapon. We can't afford a nuclear arms race in the region. Obviously, there are still extremists around the world who threaten us, which is why my commitment is to continue to have the strongest military in the world. But I also want to lead with diplomacy. I also want to lead with our values and our ideals. And I also want to make sure that we understand that if we're going to be strong abroad, we've got to do some nation-building here at home. And so take half of the money that we're spending on war to pay down the deficit, and use a whole bunch of it to rebuild America, putting people back to work with roads and bridges and schools and infrastructure. All that can help us grow and, ultimately, will help to finance what we need to keep us safe. So we've got a lot of work to do. And, the main point I guess I want to make to you is that, this being my last campaign, I'm not going to be leaving a lot on the field. And I know we've got a football family hereI see an outstanding all-starall-pro in the audienceand when you've got your last game, you've got to leave it all out there. And when the stakes are this high, we've got to work. We have to work. If you believe in the course that we've put out there, if you believe that it was the right thing to end ""don't ask, don't tell"". If you believe that it's the right thing to make sure that young people who are brought here and have gone to school here and pledge allegiance to the flag and understand themselves as Americans but just don't have the papers, that it makes no sense for us to send them to countries that they don't even know anything about. If you believe that we have to have an economy that works for everybody and not just some, then I'm going to need you to work. And some of you have been watching television and you know that the other side is not short on funds; they are not short on resources. I wasmy campaign manager was with a couple with a young son, and they were very excited to meet the campaign manager of the Obama campaign, and they said their three-year-old knows Obama, and said, ""What does President Obama do?"" And the 3 year old says, ""He approves this message""[laughter]which is a sign that things have gotten a little carried away. But for the next, little less than 2 months, we're going to see more advertising, more negative messages than we've ever seen before. And the only way we counteract that is through the determination and passion of folks like you. I'm confident we can win this thing, but it's not a sure thing. And I'm going to need all of you to stretch a little bit. To the extent that I'm preaching to the choir, I need you guys to go out and do some evangelizing yourselves. Get your friends, neighbors, coworkers. It may not always be easy, but what's more important? I had a chance to see Lisa and Don's young sons. Many of you have children. I think about Malia and Sasha. I want them to live in a country where they believe that if they're willing to put in the effort, they can be a platinum-selling artist or a President of the United States or an outstanding businessman or woman. I don't want their dreams constricted. And I also don't want our kids to think that somehow success is reserved for them, and that somehow half the country is locked out of that success. I want everybody to be successful. Black, White, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, abled or disabledI want everybody to have a chance to succeed. That's what we're fighting for in this election. That's why I need you guys stepping up. If you do, not only will we win Florida, we'll win in November. We'll finish what we started; remind the world just what it is that makes America the greatest nation on Earth. Thank you everybody. I'll see you inside. God bless you.",2008,obama
"The President. Hello, everybody! How's everybody doing? Well Audience member. Fired up! The President. You're still fired up? Audience members. Fired up! The President. You're still ready to go? Audience members. Ready to go! The President. Well, I am too. I gather I don't have to tell you guys there's an election going on. There are so many political ads on these days. I was with Jim Messina, my campaign manager, and he told me a story about meeting with this young couple, really nice people, and they're big supporters. And they had this 4-year-old son named Sammy with them. And so during the meeting, there's a picture of me on the wall, and the parents, proud as they are of their son, they say, ""Sammy, who's that?"" And he said, ""That's Barack Obama."" [Laughter] And they say, ""What does Barack Obama do?"" And he saidhe thought for a second, and he said, ""He approves this message."" [Laughter] That's what he said. True story. That's a true story. So there are a lot of ads out there. And I do approve this message. First of all, I approve the message of Chris Van Hollen, one of the finest Congressmen that we have, and I'm so grateful to him. And I approve this message because in the coming weeks, we, as Americans, have a really big choice to make, not just between two candidates or two political parties, but between two different visions of where we need to take this country. I believe that as a nation we're moving forward again. We're not where we need to benot yet. We've got a lot more work to doa lot of folks unemployed, housing market's still weak in some placesa lot of work to do to make the middle class more secure. But the question right now is, whose plan is going to keep us moving forward? Audience members. Your plan! The President. That's the right answer. You guys are a little biased. [Laughter] My opponent's plan basically reflects his belief in top-down economics. He thinks that if we just spend another $5 trillion on tax cuts that favor the wealthiest Americans, we get rid of Wall Street regulations, all problems will be solved and jobs and prosperity will rain down on everybody's head and we'll all live happily ever after. [Laughter] Now, the problem, as you are aware, is that we tried that. We tried that in the last decade. It did not work then; it will not work now. Top-down economics does not work. Instead of doubling down on the same trickle-down economics that got us into this mess in the first place, we need to keep moving forward with an economy in which the middle class is getting more secure, the middle class is growing. We succeed when the middle class sees greater opportunity and everybody who wants to work their way into the middle class see ladders of opportunity, where everybody can live up to their God-given potential. We certainly can't go very far with a leader who writes off half the Nation as a bunch of victims. When I travel this country, I don't meet victims. I meet students who are trying to work their way through college. I meet[applause]case in point. I meet single moms, like my mom, who are putting in overtime to raise their kids right. I meet senior citizens who worked all their lives and have been saving for retirement. I meet veterans who served this country bravely. I meet soldiers who are defending our freedom every single day. They don't think and I don't think that anybody is entitled to success in this country. We don't believe that government should be helping people who refuse to help themselves. But we do believe in opportunity. We do believe that hard work should pay off. We do believe everyone should get a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody plays by the same rules. We believe in an America where no matter what you look like or where you come from or who you love, you can make it if you try. That's the country we believe in. That's what we're fighting for. That's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States. I believe in what we're calling a new economic patriotism, rooted in that belief that a strong economy starts with a strong middle class. And I don't pretend that the path that we need to be on is going to be quick or easy. It took more than a few years to get to where we are, and it's going to take more time to get us out of this mess that was created by some of the same policies that my opponent's now proposing. But our problems can be solved. Our challenges can be met. We've still got the best workers in the world, the best universities, the best scientists, the bestwe've got the best stuff; we just got to bring it together. And listen, if you doubt it, just understand there's not a country on Earth that wouldn't trade places uswith us right now. That's why people from all around the world want to come here. So the path I'm offering may be harder, but it leads to a better place. And some of you have seen we've been putting forward a longer ad explaining exactly how we're going to grow the middle class, create jobs, rebuild an economy on a stronger foundation. It starts with exporting more products, outsourcing fewer jobs. I don't think we should have let Detroit go bankrupt. We reinvented an auto industry that's back on top of the world. We're creating more manufacturing jobs than any time since the 1990s, and so now people have a choice: Should we give more tax breaks to companies that are shipping jobs overseas, or do we start rewarding companies that are opening new plants and creating jobs right here in the United States of America? I want to help businesses double their exports in this country. I want to create a million new manufacturing jobs over the next 4 years, and you can make that happen by the choice we make in this election. I want greater control of our energy. After 30 years of doing nothing, we raised fuel efficiency standards on cars so by the middle of the next decade, your car or truck will go twice as far on a gallon of gas. We have doubled the amount of renewable energy from wind and solar; we're creating thousands of jobs all across the country as a result. And today, the United States of America is less dependent on foreign oil than at any time in nearly two decades. So the choice is, do we build on this progress, or do we go with a plan that would reverse it, like my opponent's proposing? I do not believe in letting oil companies write this country's energy plan. I don't believe in endangering our coastlines or having them continue to collect another $4 billion in corporate welfare from our taxpayers. So we've got a better plan that keeps investing in wind and solar and clean coal technology and allows farmers and scientists to harness new biofuels that power our cars and trucks. And we're putting construction workers back to work retrofitting buildings so they use less energy, and developing a hundred-year supply of natural gas. If we do all that, we can cut our oil imports in half by 2020. It's good for the environment, it's good for the economy, it's good for our national security. That's what I mean when I say we need to go forward. That's what we're going to need to do. We need to give every American the chance to compete by making sure we've got the best education system in the world. That wasthat's the reason I'm standing here today. That's the gateway of opportunity and the gateway into the middle class. And because of the work we've already done, millions of young people are better able to afford college already. And now we've got to do more by hiring a hundred thousand new math and science teachers; by making sure that we're providing millions of new slots for folks to retrain at community colleges for the jobs that exist right now; continue to lower tuition costs for students so they're not loaded up with debt once they graduate. My opponent thinks that it makes sense for us to gut our investment in education in order to give a tax break to the wealthy. I disagree. I think what the United States of America means is that no child should be deprived of a good education. It means that no family should have to set aside a college acceptance letter just because they don't have the money. And no employer should have to look for workers with the right skills in China instead of the United States of America. I want us to focus on education. That's what we've been doing. That's what we're going to keep on doing in a second term when I'm President of the United States. I want to make sure that we're lowering our deficit in a way that doesn't stick it to the middle class. Now, I put forward a $4 trillion deficit reduction package; a trillion dollars of cuts we've already made working with this Congress. We can do more, but we're not going to just cut our way to prosperity. We've got to reform our Tax Code so it's simple and it's fair and so that the wealthiest are doing a little bit more, going back to the same rates we had when Bill Clinton was President and our economy created nearly 23 million new jobs, the biggest surplus in history, and a whole lot of millionaires to boot. So, in fairness, my opponent has a plan, too. But as Bill Clinton pointed out, it's missing arithmetic. [Laughter] You've got a $5 trillion tax cut skewed towards the wealthy, $2 trillion in additional defense spending that our military says we don't need, and no identifiable way to pay for it. Either that blows up our deficit or, as independent analysts have said, that's going to end up meaning middle class families end up paying higher taxes. That's not the way to grow an economy. We cut taxes for middle class families because what do you do when you've got a little extra money? You spend it. Which means businesses have more customers, they make higher profits, they in turn hire more workers. That's how you grow an economy. My opponent thinks it's fair that somebody who makes $20 million a year like he does pays a lower tax rate than a cop or a teacher who makes $50,000. I don't think that's fair. I don't think that helps grow our economy. Audience members. No! The President. I refuse to ask middle class families to give up their deductions for owning a home or raising kids just to pay for another millionaire's tax cut. We're not going to do that. We're not going to ask students to pay more for college or kick kids off of Head Start or eliminate health insurance for millions of Americans who are elderly or disabled or poor, just to pay for a tax cut for me or my opponent. And we will not turn Medicare into a voucher program. Because that's something seniors, after a lifetime of labor, have earned. And we don't want them spending their golden years at the mercy of insurance companies. They should retire with the dignity and the care that they have earned. Soand, by the way, just like we're not turning Medicare into a voucher, we're not going to turn over Social Security to Wall Street. We'll strengthen those systems, but we'll do it in a responsible way to make sure it's there for future generations. Now, that's not all that's at stake in this election. Obviously, our prosperity at home is linked to what we do abroad. Four years ago, I promised we'd end the war in Iraq, and I did. I said we'd wind down the war in Afghanistan in a responsible way, and we are. We've got a new tower rising above the New York skyline, Al Qaida is on the run, and bin Laden is dead. We have delivered on our promise. But as we've seen just in the last few weeks, we still face serious threats in the world. That's why as long as I'm Commander in Chief, we'll continue to have the strongest military the world has ever known. That's why when our youngwhen our men and women come home after serving us, we're going to make sure that we serve them just as good. Because nobody should have to fight for a job or a roof over their heads when they have fought on behalf of this country. That's a solemn pledge that I make. Now, my opponent, he thought ending the war in Iraq was ""tragic."" He doesn't have a plan to wind down the war in Afghanistan. I have, and I will. And I'm also going to use the money that we're saving as we wind down these wars to do some nation-building here at home, put people back to work rebuilding our roads and our bridges and our runways. After a decade of war, it's time to do some nation-building here. It really is. So that's the choice we face. That's what's at stake. It's about how we think about this country. The other side keeps telling us through all these advertisingand they're going to be running a lot more over the next 5, 6 weeksthat bigger tax cuts, fewer regulations, that's the only way to go; that because government can't do everything, it should do almost nothing. Their basic philosophy is, if you don't have health insurance, hope you don't get sick. [Laughter] If you can't afford college, borrow money from your parents. [Laughter] That's not who we are. We don't think government can solve all our problems, but we also don't think it's the source of all our problems. We actually think that, just as we all have to take individual initiative, all have to take personal responsibility, we also think that as citizens, we've got obligations to each other and to future generations. We understand America is not about what can be done for us, but what can be done by us together, as one nation and as one people. And that's why I've said before and I will say again, the election 4 years ago wasn't about me, it was about you. You're the reason there's a little girl with a heart disorder who is going to be able to get the surgery she needs because insurance companies can't discriminate against kids with preexisting conditions. You're the reason why some single mom in Ohio is able to help her son go to college now. You did that. You're the reason why we're able to make sure that somebody who grew up here, pledged allegiance to their flag, that they're not going to be suddenly deported from the only nation that they've ever called home. You're the reason why we ended ""don't ask, don't tell."" You're the reason why our troops are coming home. You did that. So we can take confidence in the fact that we can make change, but it's going to take you guys continuing to step up. Change is going to take more than one term or one President or one party. It's not going to happen if you write off half the Nation. Election Day, 47 percent of the people did not vote for me. But I said, I may not have your vote, but I hear your voices, I need your help, and I will be your President too. And I don't know how many folks will vote for me this time around, but I say the same tothing to them. I will be your President too. I'm not fighting to create Democrat or Republican jobs, I'm fighting to create American jobs. I'm not fighting to improve schools in blue States or red States, I'm fighting to improve schools in the United States of America. I'm not fighting on behalf of rich values or poor values or 47 percent values or 53 percent values, I'm fighting for American values. I still believe in you. I still believe we're not as divided as the pundits make it seem. And if you are willing to work with me and knock on some doors and make some phone calls and go out there and get busy over the next 6 weeks, we will win this election, finish what we started, and remind the world why the United States is the greatest nation on Earth. Thank you, everybody.",2008,obama
"Thank you so much, everybody, for being here. Let me say thank you to Jay and Sharon who have just been extraordinary friends. This is probably the fourth or fifth event that I've had here, and they have been with me every step of the way. And as Jay points out, being the beloved Senator from West Virginia, where my vote totals don't always match my aspirations[laughter]for Jay to have been such a great friend all these years means the world to me. And Sharon, who does so much to keep Jay in line[laughter]but also just a powerhouse in her own right, you guys have just both been extraordinary friends, and I'm very, very grateful. So give them a big round of applause. I am so thankful to all of you. As I look around the room, I see people who have been with me since I was running for Senate and a lot of people in this space who supported me when nobody could pronounce my name. We've traveled a long road. A friend of mine, Abner Mikva, used to say that being friends with a politician is like perpetually having a kid in college. [Laughter] Every few months you have to write a check. [Laughter] And it just keeps on going and going, and you're wondering when is it going to stop. The good news is, I'm about to graduate. [Laughter] This is about to be my last semester when it comes to political races. Obviously, we couldn't have come this far without your support and friendship, and I'm grateful for that. We are in the midst of political season. My campaign manager, Jim Messina, tells a story from a couple of months ago. This is a true story. He was with a couple whobig supporters of mine. They had brought their 4-year-old son Sammy, and they were meeting with Jim and there was a picture of me. And they said, ""Sammy, who's that?"" And he said, ""That's Barack Obama."" And they said, ""And what does Barack Obama do?"" And Sammy thought about it for a second, and he says, ""He approves this message."" [Laughter] This is a true story. [Laughter] And that gives you some indication that we are in political season. [Laughter] The message I approve is the one that Jay just delivered, which is that this is as important an election as we'll see in our lifetime. This to me is actually a more consequential election than 2008. Obviously, 4 years ago, something special happened during the campaign, and we had a whole bunch of tailwinds behind Democrats. But between the Democrat and the Republican there was at least some sense of overlap in terms of how we viewed the world, right? John McCain was in favor of comprehensive immigration reform. He believed in climate change. He believed in campaign finance reform. There were differences, very profound differences, and yet there was still a sense, I think, that the differences between the parties could be bridged. And I have to tell you, as I've been campaigning and as I've been President over the last 4 years, I continue to believe that the country is not as divided as our politics would indicate. But what's going on in this political campaign is not just a contest between two individuals or even two political parties. It really, at this point, is about two fundamentally different visions for where we take the country. My opponent believes in the sort of top-down economic theories that, I think, got us into this mess in the first place. And when you look at his plans, the essence of it is massive tax cuts for folks who don't need them, even if it means cutting education investments by 20 percent, even if it means slashing our commitment to basic research and technology, even if it means turning Medicare into a voucher system. And then rolling back regulations that keep our air clean and our water clean and ensure that consumers aren't taken advantage of. And the notion is, is that if that happens, if government just gets out of the way, then jobs and prosperity will rain down on everybody. And I've got a different vision. I deeply believe that America is built on individual initiative and risk-taking and entrepreneurship. And people are just putting in a lot of blood and sweat to build their lives. And as Lincoln said, we don't need government to do anything that we can do better ourselves. But I also think that our history has been one in which, when we are providing opportunity for everybody, regardless of what they look like or where they come from or what their last name is or who they love and that middle class is broad and deep and strong and people who are willing to work hard have ladders of opportunity into the middle class, when that happens, we are all better off. And that's what I've tried to do over the last 4 years, is stay focused on how do we create opportunity for everybody. Now, we had a lot of work to do initially: saving an auto industry, making sure the banking system functioned, and making sure that we didn't fall into a great depression. But my job was not just to get us back to where we were in 2007, we had to tackle some issues that mattered over the long haul and problems that had been building up over decades. And that's why we championed health care reform. We knew it wasn't going to be politically popular, but it was the right thing to do. That's the reason that we have emphasized having a Tax Code that encourages manufacturing in this country and makes sure that we're all doing our part in reducing the deficit. That's the reason why we've put such an emphasis on reforming our schools and also making sure that everybody who wants to go to college can afford it. That's why, internationally, our emphasis has been to make sure that we're leading not just with the incredible military and the unbelievable men and women who are in uniform, who make sacrifices for us every single day, but that we give our military some help by having a diplomatic corps and a White House that is leading with our values and leading with our ideals. And so, as a consequence, we've made great strides, but we've got a lot more work to do on that path to making sure that everybody has opportunity. And that's what this election is going to be about. Now, we only have 39 days left, and I think that there is a tendency among Democrats to either think that the sky is falling[laughter]and that we are in the midst of utter disaster or everything is great[laughter]and let's start planning for the library 5 years from now. And I have to tell you that this is going to be a competitive race all the way down to the wire, precisely because there are a lot of people out there who are still hurting and who have legitimate questions about how are we going to get this economy growing as fast as we want and how are we going to bring back our deficit and how's my kid's life going to be better than mine. And so we're going to have to work our hearts out over the next 39 days. The good news is that the message we're presenting, when it's actually stripped away of partisanship, when you just present to people, here are two contrasting ideasand no labels are attached, these aren't Obama's ideas or Romney's ideas, Democratic ideas or Republican ideas; these are just ideas for how we move the country forwardit turns out that people think our ideas are the right ones. So if you ask folks, how important is education, they say nothing is more important. They know the world is getting more competitive and we've got to train our kids to compete. Well, how do we do that? My opponent has a philosophy that says we reduce our support and we rely on school vouchers and that's somehow going to move things forward and let young people borrow money from their parents to go to college and we'll be successful. And we present an idea that says we're going to continue with Race to the Top to prompt reform and raise standards and hire new teachers in math and science and make sure that young people can afford to go to college by building on the work we've already done to make tuition more affordable and work with universities and colleges to reduce tuition. And lo and behold, it turns out they think that's the better way to go. You talk to them about energy, and we try to explain: We've cut oil imports by the largest amount in the last 20 years. They're at the lowest point they've been in nearly two decades. But what we've said is we also want to end $4 billion a year in subsidies to oil companies and instead use that money to continue to support wind and solar and biofuels and work to find the next technologies that can help us to gain greater fuel efficiency in our cars and put people back to work retrofitting our homes and our businesses so that they're more energy efficientwhich idea do you think is better? They like our ideas. If you talk to them about the Tax Code and you say, do you think it's fair that somebody making $20 million a year pays a lower tax rate than somebody making $50,000 a year, lo and behold, they don't think that's fair. And when you ask them should we reduce the deficit by cutting out things that we don't need, but also by making sure that our Tax Code is asking people like those of you in attendance here today to go back to the rates we had under Bill Clinton, they think that's a pretty good idea, particularly when they know that the alternative is gutting our commitment to the things that help us grow. And when you talk about foreign policy and you say we ended the war in Iraq, we're going after terrorists, we're winding down the war in Afghanistan, and we're going to use the money that we save fighting the wars to do some nation-building here at home, Republican or Democrat, you get a cheer. So we are well positioned; our ideas are right; our vision is one that is fact based, evidence based and that has actually a strong bipartisan tradition. But nevertheless, this is going to be a tough race. So I think my main message to all of you is I could not be prouder of the support you've already given me, but our work is not yet done. And I'm going to need all of you over the next 39 days to put as much into this thing as you can. If everybody here has written all you can write when it comes to financial support, go find some friends. If you've got friends and neighbors in battleground States, call them up. Travel out there and knock on some doors. It's good for you. Those of you who've done it, you know. It's an adventure, but it's important, and it gives you some sense of what's at stake. I don't want anybody to feel that somehow we're done 6 weeks out, because the American people are still hurting, and they want to know that their President is thinking about them every single day and fighting for this job because he is passionate about moving this country forward and passionate about advocating on their behalf. And so I hope that all of you feel that same determination that I do. A lot of folks, as I do these photo lines, they say, thank you for serving. I know that having folks write $10 million checks just to rain negative ads on top of you can't be fun, and we're so grateful, et cetera. And I have to remind them, as Michelle points out, I volunteered for this job. [Laughter] It is the greatest privilege that anybody could ever have. And when I think about the sacrifices that so many Americans make every single day and have made in the past to allow me to be part of this incredible democracy, it gets me inspired. It doesn't get me tired. I go to Walter Reed every so often to talk to our wounded warriors. Most of these guys are 20, 21, 23, 25. They've got young families. The ones who've lost a leg are oftentimes the lucky ones. And yet despite everything that they go through and their families go through, when you talk to them, they couldn't be prouder of their service to this country. They love America so much, and they know what they're doing is important every single day. And when I leave there, I'm reminded that we're all called to sacrifice in some fashion for this country, and we may not be able to match the sacrifices that they're making, but we better work hard. We better try. We better try to make sure that we've got an economy that works for everybody. We better try to preserve freedom for women to make their own health care choices. We better fight to make sure that the progress we've made on things like ""don't ask, don't tell"" don't get reversed. We better fight to make sure that we have real immigration reform, and some kid who's here, who's grown up here and pledging allegiance to our flag isn't suddenly deported from the only country they've ever know. We've got to fight for it. And I've still got a lot of fight in me. So I hope you've got a lot of fight in you. Let's get to work. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you! Thank you, everybody. Everybody have a seat, have a seat. Well, thank you so much, everybody. I have had a chance to say hello and give people hugs and kisses, but I want to just take a moment to maybe talk a little bit about this campaign. Before I do, I want to acknowledge somebody who's been an extraordinary champion on behalf of the people of Washington, DC, for so many years, and she's a great friend; Eleanor Holmes Norton is here. Where's Eleanor? She's out there somewhere. I've been telling a story that my campaign manager told me. About a month ago, he was meeting with this young couple that were really strong supporters. And they were in a room, and there was a picture of me. And this young couple had this cute kid, about 4 years old, named Sammy. And as they were talking, they saw the picture of me, and so they said, ""Sammy, who's that?"" And Sammy says, ""That's Barack Obama."" And they say, ""And, Sammy, what does Barack Obama do?"" And he thinks for a moment and he says, ""He approves this message."" [Laughter] It's a true story. [Laughter] True story. So that tells you that we are in political season. [Laughter] And unless you've been living under a rock or did not pay your cable bill[laughter]you understand where Sammy is coming from. I do approve this message, because I genuinely believe this is as consequential an election as we're going to see in our lifetime. And it's not just a choice between two candidates or two political parties, it really is a choice between two different visions for America. My opponent believes in top-down economics, the idea that if folks at the top are doing very, very well, then somehow prosperity rains down on everybody. So his plans are tailored accordingly: big tax cuts skewed towards the wealthy and getting rid of regulations that have had an impact on Wall Street and with our health systems. And he believes that if we just do that, then everything is going to go just right. And I've got a different vision. I ran 4 years ago, and many of you supported me 4 years ago, because I wanted to restore the basic bargain that I believe built this country: the notion that in this country, if you work hard, no matter who you are, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter who you love, you can make it. You can make it. It doesn't mean you're going to not have some tough times once in a while. It doesn't mean that you're not going to have to make sacrifices. Ultimately, this is a country where individual initiative and personal responsibility are what counts more than anything. But the notion is, is that in this country everybody should have a fair shot and everybody should do their fair share and everybody plays by the same rules. And everything we've done over the last 4 years has been designed to figure out how we can restore that sense that we've got a strong and broad and deep middle class and that there are ladders of opportunity for people to get into the middle class. That's why we saved an auto industry that's come roaring back. That's the reason why we emphasize tax relief for middle income folks. That's why we fought so hard to make sure that we were expanding opportunities for young people to go to college, by keeping their interest rates low and expanding Pell grants and capping their payments as a percentage of income when they're paying back their student loans. All these things were designed to make sure that those young people got a chance. That's the reason why we passed health care reform, because I believe that part of middle class security is not being bankrupt when you get sick. That's the reason why we've invested so heavily in community colleges, so that our workers can be trained for the jobs that are available right now and the jobs of the future. That's the reason why we said we've got to have an energy plan that not only develops our traditional sources like oil and gas, but also that we are developing new energy sources: wind and solar and biofuels. And we've doubled the production of clean energy over the last 4 years. We have cut in half fuel efficiency standards for carsor we've actually doubled them so that, as a consequence, cars and trucks are going to be gettinggo twice as far on a gallon of gas as they were 4 years ago. That's good for our environment, that's good for the economy, and it's good for our national security. That's the reason why we have fought so hard to make sure that we've got a Consumer Finance Protection Bureau that is looking out for folks when it comes to getting a mortgage or taking out a credit card or going to payday loanall of the transactions that ordinary families are going through every single day. It's why we fought to help deserving families who have been making their payments and haven't done anything wrong to avoid foreclosure and refinance their homes at historically low rates. All these things are tied together, because it has to do with how do we make sure that we're creating broad-based opportunity in this country. And it's based on not just a belief in fairness, but also evidence about how the economy grows, because when middle class families are doing well, when there are ladders of opportunity into the middle class for folks who are having a tough time, then suddenly, you've got more customers for businesses, and businesses are more profitable, and businesses then hire more workers, and you get a virtuous cycle that keeps going. And that's how America has always grown. So now the question is, do we build on that success, or do we return to the same policies that got us into the mess in the first place? Audience members. No! The President. And on each of these issues there is a stark choice. When it comes to our Tax Code, I want to take away tax breaks from companies that are shipping jobs overseas; I want to give to companies that are investing here in the United States. Governor Romney has a different view. On education, I want to make sure that not only are we expanding reform, but we're hiring new math and science teachers who are getting in there and improving our kids' performance; that we are expanding more slots for community colleges; that we're working with colleges and universities to reduce tuition. Governor Romney has a very different vision that would involve cutting education spending by 20 percent. Governor Romney believes in oil and gas, but apparently, he doesn't believe in wind and solar and thinks those are ""imaginary"" or ""fads."" [Laughter] No, you're laughing, but that's what he said. I don't want a situation where oil companies are writing our energy plans. I think wepeople should know that our oil and gas production is higher than it's been in 50 years. Our natural gas production is taking off in ways that will change the politics of the globe, and we need to encourage that. But we're not going to cede leadership and the new sources of energy of tomorrow. We need to go forward with that. And that's a choice. When it comes to deficit reduction, I think we have to have a balanced approach that says folks like me can pay a little bit more and go back to the Clinton rates that we had that created 23 million new jobs. I'm not going have millions of students pay more for college or kick kids off of Head Start or voucherize Medicare in order to pay for a tax cut for myself or for millionaires or billionaires. That's now how you grow an economy. On foreign policy, I said I'd end the war in Iraq. Governor Romney thinks that's ""tragic."" I don't. I said we'd wind down the war in Afghanistan, and that is what we are doing. We still don't know what my opponent's plan is when it comes to that. We said that we would go after Al Qaida, and they are on the run, and bin Laden is dead. And so we will maintain the strongest military the world has ever known, but we're also going to make sure that when our troops come home, that we're treating them with the honor and the respect that they have earned, because they shouldn't have to fight for a job or a roof over their heads when they come home. And it's not just economics. It's not just foreign policy. It's also what kind of society do we believe in. I believe it was the right thing to do to end ""don't ask, don't tell."" I believe in a country where it doesn't matter who you love; it matters what you do, and it matters how well you perform. That's what I believe. I believe we did the right thing in saying that a young girl who was brought here, has gone to school here, and pledged allegiance to our flag, shouldn't suddenly be deported to some country she's never been to. I believe women are very capable of making health care decisions by themselves. That's what I believe. And I believe in a Supreme Court that believes that. So the stakes could not be higher. And the question now is, how much are we willing to fight for this? Obviously coming out of the convention we got a little bit of momentum, mainly attributable to the First Lady, Michelle Obama, as well as Bill Clinton who, somebody saidsomebody tweeted right after he made the speech, he should be made secretary of explaining stuff. [Laughter] So we got a little bit of momentum. But the fact is this is going to be a close race. It will go down to the wire. There are still a lot folks hurting out there. There are a lot of questions for people who are still anxious about their futures. We've gone through a tough time, this country has. And nobody knows it better than me, because I've been talking to people all across the country every single day and they tell me the struggles they're going through with losing a job or losing a home or losing their savings or not knowing whether or not they're going to be able to send their kids to school. And that's what I'm thinking about every single day. And so as I go into the last 39 days of this campaign, their voices are what drive me. This is not just a matter of who we elect President. It's also: Are those voices going to be heard? Do those voices have room at the table? Do they impact policy here in Washington? Are we thinking about those folks every single day? And the only way that happens is if we mobilize people all across the country not just to vote, but to feel like that vote is going to count and that citizenship matters, that it's going to make a difference. Somebody asked me, what lesson have you learned after 4 years, and I said, I've learned that change doesn't just happen from the inside. Change happens from the outside. My opponent got very excited. He thought, well, he's waving the white flag, he's giving up on change. [Laughter] I had to explain it: You haven't been paying attention. [Laughter] I said thatI say that now; I said that in '08. The whole point of our campaign the first time around was this belief, this profound belief in the decency and the goodness and the common sense of the American people and the notion that change doesn't start in Washington, it starts with them. And everything we've been able to do is because they have empowered me to do it or they have pushed Congress to do it. But that's who I bet on. That's who I've got faith in. That's who I have confidence in. And I just want to work as hard as I can over these next 39 days to earn the privilege of being able to spend the next 4 years, every single day, thinking about how I can make life a little bit better for people who work hard in this country. That's what I'm fighting for. And I'm going to need you there with me. So if you guys have already written all the checks you can[laughter]go find some friends to write some more checks. [Laughter] If you haven't been out there knocking on doors, we will send you out to knock on some doors. If you've got some phone calls to make into the battleground States, as soon as you're done here, start getting that list because we're going to need to start making them. This is going to be a sprint for the next 39 days. And I am confident that if we do what we need to do, if I do what I need to do, that not only will we win this election, we'll be able to finish what we started and remind the world why the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth. Thank you very much, everybody. God bless you. God bless America. Let's get to work. All right? Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you, everybody. Thank you. Thank you so much. Everybody, please have a seat. First of all, you just heard from the future of the Democratic Party, the great mayor of San Antonio, Julian Castro. We're so proud of him. There are so many people I could thank tonight, so I'm just going to focus on three individuals. First of all, my unbelievable Southern California cochairs: John Emerson and Ken Solomon. Please give them a big round of applause. They have been tireless in their efforts. They have been unbelievable. The other person that I want to acknowledge in particularbecause I said this to them privately, I've got to say it publiclyJeffrey and Marilyn Katzenberg have beenthey have been tireless and stalwart and have never wavered through good times and bad since my first Presidential race, back when a lot of people still couldn't pronounce my name. [Laughter] And I will always be grateful to them for just the incredible support that they've given. So thank you very much. Thanks, both of you. Some of you are aware thatwell, all of you are aware that Michelle and I just celebrated our 20th anniversary. And the actual anniversary date was not that romantic. [Laughter] There was some speculation as to whether this had an impact on my performance. [Laughter] But I did make it up to her on Saturday. We went out to dinner, a date night. And it was a wonderful evening. It was a private room, because people kind of lean over and start listening if we're in the booth next to them. [Laughter] And Secret Service gets nervous. [Laughter] And we had this wonderful young waiter, and he brought us all our stuff, and he was patient with us as we were dawdling over the menu. And we were milking it for all it was worth because we don't get out that often. But at the end of the dinnerit was very professional, very unobtrusivebut at the end of the dinner, he just said, I wanted to just say how much I appreciate you, because you saved my mother's life, because my mother had a stroke, she wasn't yet qualifying for Medicare, and because of the Affordable Care Act, we were able to get her coverage that allows her to take her medicines and is keeping her alive. And it reminded me of why we do this. I am a fairly competitive guy. Clooney has played basketball with me. [Laughter] And I don't like to loseespecially not to actors. [Laughter] Actor George T. Clooney We were on the same team. [Laughter] The President. We were on the same team. I put him on the team, and we did win. Mr. Clooney. That's right, we did. The President. And so sometimes during the course of campaigns, we get caught up in the sport of politics and the ups and the downs and doing the this and the that and how much money did we raise and how many doors have we knocked on. And all that's important, but it is in service of that waiter, Anthony's mom. Or some young girl in Phoenix who's going to be able to get the surgery that she needs because the insurance company can't impose a lifetime limit. Or the auto worker in Toledo who was laid off his job and couldn't figure out how he was going to support his family and had to have that conversation with his kids explaining how dad is out of work right now and so we're going to have to tighten our belts, and we're not sure we're going to make the mortgage payments. And then suddenly, the plant reopens, and people come back to work. And it's not just about a paycheck, but it's about that sense of being part of a community and building something that's worthwhile and holding your head high and knowing your kid looks up to you because you're looking after him and building for his future. That's why we do what we do. That's why I got into this business. And there are times during the course of a Presidency when you are so focused on policy and Congress and data and analysis, and yet one of the wonderful things about the Presidency is that at least once a day, you're reminded that's why you do it. That's why you fight. That's why whatever controversies or press or all that stuff that comes up, it all, in the end, is worthwhile because you know that you're in some small way helping a whole bunch of people realize their dreams. And that's what's at stake over the next 30 days. It's not clinging onto an office. It's not about power. It's not about perks. It's not about winning. It's about, can we sustainover the next 30 days, and then over the next 4 years, and then over the next decade, and then over the next two decadesthat sense that there's something about this country that allows everybody to get a fair shot and allows everybody who is willing to work hard and take responsibility to chase their dreams. It doesn't guarantee people success. It doesn't guarantee that they're not going to hit bumps in the road and there are not going to be tragedies in their lives. But the idea that in this country, everybody counts and that for all our individual initiative and self-reliance, we also do some things together as one people and one Nationthat's what the next 30 days is about. And that's why I intend to win. That's why we're going to be working so hard to win. Most of you guys are pretty familiar with policy, so I won't bore you with too many details. But I can't recall an election in my lifetime in which the contrasts are sharper or the stakes are higher. We are going through this incredible transformation, not just here in the United States, but globally. The world has shrunk. It's more competitive. There are huge opportunities to create peace and security and prosperity, but there are also enormous possibilities of the American Dream shrinking and the world becoming more dangerous. And on each and every issue that we're talking about, my opponent and I just have very different ideas about where we need to go. I believe that we're going to have to have the kind of economic policies that reward investment here in the United States and create more opportunities for businesses to thrive. My opponent, his basic view is that the status quo of doing as little as possible, unimpeded as possible for folks who are moving jobs overseas, or not providing their workers health care, or you name it, that that kind of status quo is acceptable. I disagree. When it comes to education, he is prepared to gut our investments in education and college in order to provide tax cuts to people in this room who don't need them and weren't asking for them. I think that us making investments in early childhood education and making sure that our high schools are graduating kids that are capable of learning and making sure our community colleges are there to train our workers for the jobs that are out there right now and maintaining tuition that's affordable for young peopleI think that's absolutely vital. That's how we win the race to the future. On energy, I'm big on oil and gas and developing clean coal technology, but I also believe that if we're ever going to have control of our energy future, then we've got to invest in solar and wind and biofuels and that it does make sense for us to double our fuel efficiency standards on cars. And that's not a socialist plot[laughter]for us to reduce our energy usage. It's the smart thing to do. It's right for our national energy. It's right for our economy. It's right for the environment. He disagrees. I think that it's going to be important for us to make sure that as we reduce this deficit, we do it in a way that's balanced and fair. And I have to tell you, after 4 years of having a pretty good front row seat on the Federal Government, there's no doubt that there are things that we can do smarter. There are aspects to the Federal Government that were designed in the 1930s and need to be redesigned, and there are savings to be had. And we've gone after waste and fraud and regulations that aren't working, and we're going to continue to be as aggressive as possible on that. But the bottom line is, is that there are certain things we need to pay for. And when my opponent proposes $5 trillion worth of tax cuts, $2 trillion of additional military spending that our military is not asking for, and doesn't provide a single detail on how to pay for it, what that means is either we're going to be blowing up the deficit or we're going to be sticking it to folks who can't afford it. Somebody is going to pick up the tab. And I don't want it to be middle class families who are just barely making ends meet. I don't want it to be kids on Head Start who get kicked off and potentially foreclose a futuretheir future. I don't want it to be students who suddenly have to pay $1,000 more in tuition costs because they're not getting the same level of Pell grants. I don't want it to be some family that's got an autistic kid who needs help from Medicaid or a senior in a nursing home whose family depends on that support. I don't want it to be a senior who is relying on Medicare and just barely getting by. That's not who we are. That's not what we're about. And it's not a smart way to grow the economy. So on every issue domestically we've got differences, and I haven't evenwe haven't talked about the fact that my opponent feels comfortable with Washington making decisions about women's health care that women, Michelle tells me, are perfectly capable of making themselves. [Laughter] We haven't talked about what's at stake with respect to the Supreme Court. We haven't talked about what's at stake with respect to civil liberties. And obviously, there's a lot at stake internationally. And an opponent who calls me ending the war in Iraq ""tragic"" or suggests that somehow we should stay longer in Afghanistan has a very different world view, different perspective. And so the question now is, how hard are we willing to fight for the vision that we profess? How hard am I willing to fight for it? But it's not just me in this thing: How hard are you guys willing to fight for it? There are times sometimes whenlike in 2008 where politics has just been trendy. It's kind of cool to be an Obama supporter in '08. [Laughter] And there are some folks who got in early, and they can go around saying, I told you so. [Laughter] We knew this guy was going to make it. And then there are times where you just have to grind it out, because it's hard. It's hard work bringing about change. But as we go into these last 30 days, I just constantly want you to think about what's at stake among your friends and your family, but also the stories in your own past about maybe an immigrant parent who came here and was able to succeed because they got a student loan or somebody in your familyor maybe youwho had a door open to him because you were willing to work hard, but you didn't come from wealth or privilege. And the question is, is that what we're going to sustain for our children's future as well? As a practical matter, nothing that my opponent offers will create more jobs, reduce our deficit, grow our middle class, improve our education system, improve our environment, or make us safer around the world. And I'm not just offering prospective plans. Over the last 4 years, I've shown you that we have created jobs, improved our education system, made us safer in the world, helped to clean up our environment. I haven't just talked about it, I've done it. And I intend to continue to do it. So to all of you here tonight, I want to say how grateful I am. But I also want to tell you we're not finished yet, and I'm a big believer in closing the deal. [Laughter] So you will see me working as hard as I have ever worked for the next 3 yearsor for the next 30 days. [Laughter] It will seem like 3 years, but it will be 30 days. [Laughter] And then, you'll see me working as hard as I ever have over the next 4 years. But I'm going to need you guys alongside me and even after the election, because the election is just a means to an end. Even after the election, I'm going to be continuing to call on you. It won't be for political donations, but it's going to be for your time and your energy and your ideas and your effort, because we've got a lot of work to do. The one thing that I remain extraordinarily confident about is in the American people and in our future if we make good decisions. And I travel around the world a lot, and I'm not somebody who expects that other people love their country any less than we love ours, but I will tell you there is something exceptional and special about this country. And there are very few people around the world who wouldn't do everything they could to be citizens of the United States or have the same opportunities that we have. And we've just got to make sure that that's there for that waiter who served Michelle and I the other night, for his kids, for my kids, for your kids, our grandkids. If we work hard these next 30 days, we'll be able to deliver that. Thank you very much, everybody. God bless you. Thank you.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you! Thank you so much, everybody. It's good to be back in San Francisco. Thank you. Everybody, have a seat, have a seat. I've already had a chance to say hello to everybody. Pam, that waswhere did Pam go? There she is. That was the sweetest introduction I've had since I've been President, and it means so much. I know that many of you are wondering, why does she look so much younger than him? [Laughter] And all I can say is genes. [Laughter] But Pam has been a great friend, a great supporter. We've known each other for a long time. And it's true that actually the environment that we grew up in, I think for both of us, still provides us a certain ballast. Sometimes people wonder why it is that I seem pretty even keeled. And I'd like to think that part of it is that's how I'm hardwired, but part of it is, when you spent your formative years in Hawaii, you think to yourself, it can't be that bad. [Laughter] And if it is, then you go to Sandy Beach, and you bodysurf, and you feel fine afterwards. [Laughter] It washes away all worries. So I'm not going to spend a long time making a speech at the top end because I think we're going to reserve some time for questions. Most of you have been great friends for many years. Many of you supported me when I was running for the United States Senate, much less running for President. And so I think you know who I am and you know what I care about. And all I'm going to do is just talk a little bit about this campaign, which has 29 days left. Some of you know that Michelle and I celebrated our 20th anniversary. It wasn't the most romantic setting[laughter]the actual anniversary. So it was on debate night, so as a consequence, we then scheduled for date night on Saturday. And we went out and snuck our way through Washington, got to a restaurant in Georgetown. And there was a little private room, because although sometimes we're able to sit in where everybody else is sitting, sometimes people lean over and are kind of listening in to what we're saying, and I wanted to make sure that I was giving my wife undivided attention. And it was a wonderful dinner, and we had a great time. And the waiter, a young man, couldn't have been sweeter, very unobtrusive, didn't say much; just was doing a great job. At the end, as I was signing the checkand yes, I do still have a credit card. I mean, I[laughter]sometimes it takes me a while to find it. [Laughter] At the end, I handed him over the credit card, and he said, Mr. President, I hope you don't mind, I hope I'm not being obtrusive, but I just want you to know that you saved my mom's life. And I said, well, of course I don't mind, but what do you mean? And he said, well, my mother had a stroke. She didn't yet qualify for Medicare. And because of the health care law, she was able to get insurance and can pay for her medications. And so I just want you to know that that meant a lot to me, and I hope you didn't mind me saying that. And as he went out, I told Michelle that probably once a day I get something like that, maybe not always as dramatic. But every time I have a conversation like that, it reminds me that what we do is not sport. It's not simply about who's up and who's down and polls and how much money is raised and so forth. Ultimately, it's about that young man and his mom and the belief that in this great country of ours, we're going to make sure that every single person is treated with dignity and with respect and that they're going to have a chance, if they're willing to work hard and take responsibility, to live a full and fruitful life. That's why we do this. That's what these events are about. It's in service of this larger goal. And sometimes we lose sight of that. But with 29 days left in this campaign, I hope none of you lose sight of it, because we've got a lot more work to do. We've got a lot more work to do to win the election, and then we have a lot more work to do to actually deliver on the promise. When we were in Grant Park in 2008, I explained this is not the end point; this is simply the end of the beginning. And now we've got to get started to really deliver on the incredible possibilities and promise of this country if we make good decisions and we keep the future of our kids and our grandkids in mind in everything that we do. Now, having said all that, Pam is right that I am pretty competitive, and I very much intend to win this election. But we're only going to do it if everybody is almost obsessive for the next 29 days. So most of you have contributed to the campaign, but there is more than you can do over the next 29 days. There's a phone call you can make. There's an e-mail you can send. There is a trip into Nevada you can do to knock on doors. There are cousins and uncles and friends in battleground States all across the country. You need to mobilize every resource that you've got to make sure that we bring this home. And I'm confident we will, but we can't take anything for granted. So with that, let me just open it up to some questions.",2008,obama
"The President. Thank you, everybody. Thank you. Everybody, please have a seat. It's good to be in Florida. It's good to be in Miami. Thank you so much, everybody. First of all Audience member. I love you! The President. I love you back. I do. [Laughter] Can everybody please give Lidia a big round of applause for the wonderful introduction. Give it up for Sheila E. I was backstage. I was[applause]. I want to thank an extraordinary Congresswoman and somebody who is just fighting on behalf of families not just here in Florida, but all across the country every single day, my friend Debbie Wasserman Schultz. Give her a big round of applause. To one of my campaign cochairs who isshe's putting in a lot of miles and could not be a more passionate advocate on behalf of the things that we work for: Eva Longoria. We're thrilled to have her here. I want to thank Kirk Wagar for all the great work here in FloridaKirk. And finally, I want to thank your former Governor, somebody who's been a great friend, Charlie Crist in the house. Charlie reminds all of us that the values we're fighting for, they're not Democratic values or Republican values, they are American values. And that's why we're here. I want to thank everybody for the incredible support. It is going to make a difference. But I want everybody to understand we've got some work to do. We've got an election to win. In just over 2 weeks, on October 27, Florida gets to start voting early. And I assume everybody is registered here. If you're not, we'll sign you up right now. [Laughter] Or actually, I think the registration deadline was yesterday, so you better have gotten it done. [Laughter] But I'm assuming they wouldn't have let you in if you hadn't registered. [Laughter] Everything that we fought for in 2008 is on the line in 2012. So we are going to have to be fired up, and we're going to have to be ready to go. And I'm going to need your help to finish what we started. And it's useful to remember what we've done. Four years ago, I told you I'd end the war in Iraq, and we did. I said that we'd end the war in Afghanistan, and we are. I said that we'd refocus on the people who actually attacked us on 9/11, and today, Al Qaida is on its heels and Usama bin Laden is dead. Four years ago, I promised to cut taxes for middle class families, and we have, by $3,600. I promised to cut taxes for small-business owners, and we have, 18 times. We got back every dime we used to rescue the financial system, but we also passed a historic law to end taxpayer-funded Wall Street bailouts for good. We passed health care reform so that your insurance companies can't jerk you around anymore or tell you that being a woman is somehow a preexisting condition. We repealed ""don't ask, don't tell"" so that nobody is ever kicked out of the military because of who they are or who they love. And when Governor Romney said let's ""let Detroit go bankrupt,"" we declined his business advice and we reinvented a dying auto industry that is now back on top of the world. And that's not just critical to economies in the Midwest, it's vital to our entire economy, something every American should be proud of. Today, 4 years after the worst economic crisis of our lifetimes, we're moving forward again. People don't remember, the month I was sworn into office, we lost 800,000 jobs. Our businesses have now added more than 5 million new jobs over the last 2 years. Unemployment has fallen from a peak of 10 percent down to 7.8 percent, the lowest level since I took office. More Americans are getting jobs. Manufacturing is coming back to America. We signed three trade deals that is helping to open up markets all over the world, including the Latin American market, which is absolutely vital to the economy and Florida and southern Florida. Even in the most hard-pressed States like Florida, we're starting to see home values finally start picking up again. So, look, we are not yet where we need to be. We've got a lot more work to do. And obviously, in a State like Florida that was so hard hit when the housing bubble burst, we've got too many friends and neighbors who are looking for work. We've got too many families who are still struggling to pay the bills. Too many homes are still underwater. Too many young people are burdened by debt after they graduate from college. But if there's one thing I know, it is this, and that is we have come too far to turn back now. The American people have worked too hard to get to this point. And after all that we have been through together, after all that we have fought for together, why would we go backwards? Why would we go back to the very same policies that led us to this mess in the first place? That is not an option. I won't allow that to happen. You can't allow it to happen. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States. Because we will not let it happen. We're moving forward. We're not going backwards. I have seen too much pain and too much struggle to let this country go back to the economic policies that don't work and that are at the heart of what Governor Romney is offering. The centerpiece of his economic plan: a $5 trillion tax cut that favors those of us who've been extraordinarily successful in this country. And he's been pitching this plan for a whole year now; stood up on stage in primary debates and proudly promised that his new tax cut would reduce the tax burden for everybody, including the top 1 percent. Now, of course, you wouldn't know that from listening to the latest version of Mitt Romney. [Laughter] I was telling folksI spoke at Miami University, and I was saying that after a year in which he was calling himself ""severely conservative,"" he's now trying to convince us that he was severely kidding about everything. So[laughter]. Now, these days, whatever you're for, he's for. [Laughter] Loves the middle class, loves Medicare, loves teachers. [Laughter] He even said that he loves the most important parts of Obamacareloves them. [Laughter] And when it comes to all the things that he's actually promised to do as President, suddenly he's got a case of amnesia. [Laughter] Tax breaks for outsourcers? I've never heard of it. Saying we should cut back on teachers? Doesn't ring your bell. [Laughter] Kicking 200,000 young Floridians off their parent's insurance plan? Who, me? [Laughter] When he's asked about the cost of his tax plan, he pretends it just doesn't exist. What $5 trillion? I don't know anything about a $5 trillion tax cut. Don't pay any attention to the $5 trillion tax cut on my web site. [Laughter] It's still there. [Laughter] But this has beenthis is not unique to him. This has been the strategy of the other side for the entire 4 years that I've been in office. They expect that you've forgotten what happened, that we lost 9 million jobs in the worst economic crisis of our lifetimes as a consequence of misguided policies. And they think that we haven't been paying attention now to Governor Romney for the last year and a half. And he will say whatever it takes to try to close the deal. He's counting on the fact that you won't remember that what he's selling is exactly what led us to this crisis in the first place. And so, Florida, part of our task over the next 4 weeks is to let him know we remember. We know full well that if he gets a chance, Governor Romney will rubberstamp the top-down economic policies that have been promoted by his congressional allies, including his running mate, who will be debating tonight. And we can't afford that kind of future. His plan will not create jobs. It will not help the middle class. It will not speed up the recovery. In fact, it will slow down the recovery. And we can't afford that. We cannot go back to what we were doing. Not now. Not when we've come so far. We've got to keep moving forward. And that's why I'm running for a second term, because I see a vision for the future in which everybody gets a fair shot and everybody's doing their fair share and everybody's playing by the same rules. I know that jobs and prosperity don't trickle down from the top. They grow from a strong, thriving middle class and creating ladders of opportunity into that middle class for everybody who is willing to work hard. I know that more tax breaks for people who are shipping jobs overseas won't create jobs. What does is supporting small businesses, manufacturers who are making products right here in Florida, products stamped with those proud words: Made in America. Instead of providing tax breaks for outsourcing, we have to reward those companies that are investing in creating jobs right here. And we can do it. That's the choice that you face in this election. We can create more jobs by controlling our own energy. There are thousands of Floridians right now who are making a great living promoting solar energy and wind energy and clean energy all across this State. We doubled our investment in clean energy, which is creating jobs and is good for our environment. And we also raised fuel standards so that by the nextmiddle of the next decade, your cars and trucks will go twice as far on a gallon of gas. And today, the United States of America is less dependent on foreign oil than at any time in the past two decades. So we need to build on that progress, not go backwards. My plan would continue to cut our oil imports in half by investing in the clean energy that's creating jobs right here: wind and solar, fuel-efficient cars, long-lasting batteries. And we can do so byand we can pay for it by no longer giving $4 billion a year in taxpayer subsidies to oil companies that are doing just fine. We'll help produce more oil, but we don't need to give them $4 billion to do it. Let's make sure that we don't lose the race for clean energy to China or other countries. We need to develop that technology right here in the United States. And it will be good for our environment. It will do something about carbon in our atmosphere, and that is not a joke. That is not a hoax. That's our children's future. And folks here in Miami understand that better than anybody, because the impact onof climate change will be significant on our kids and our grandkids unless we take those steps. We can't just deny our way out of these things. It's a threat to our children's future. I believe that we've got to have the best education system in the world. That is economic development. That's not something separate and apart. If our kids have the skills they need to compete, then our economy will grow. And I'm only here because of the education that I got. I wasn't born into wealth or fame. You hadn't heard of the Obama name before I ran. [Laughter] Had you? No. [Laughter] Let's face it. First time you heard it, you probably thought, the guy might be Japanese, I don't know. [Laughter] Italian? Who knows? Audience member. Latino. The President. Latino. [Laughter] Right. The Obama family from Jalisco. [Laughter] But education is what gave me opportunity. It's what gave so many of you opportunity. It's the gateway into a middle class life. So when I hear Governor Romney saying hiring more teachers won't grow the economy over the next 4 years, I have to say, no, actually it will. But more importantly, what about our kids over the next 40 years? What about our economy over the next 40 years? We can gut education to pay for tax breaks we don't need, or we can recruit 100,000 new math and science teachers. We can provide better early childhood education. We can train 2 million more workers at community colleges. We can lower the cost of tuition for our young people. That's an agenda for growth. That's what creates opportunity. That's what we can do together. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States. Four more. Audience members. Four more years! Four more years! Four more years! The President. I mentioned that we ended the war in Iraq, that we're ending the war in Afghanistan. I want to use that money to pay down our deficit, put our people back to work rebuilding roads and bridges and schools all across America. Right here in Florida, we've got huge projects that are going on all over the State that will build the infrastructure to facilitate more trade, move more goods more efficiently, help businesses grow. And we have the resources to do it if we make good decisions. But Governor Romney said it was ""tragic"" to end the war in Iraq. He repeated this last week, said we should still have troops on the ground in Iraq. And I fundamentally disagree with that. I think bringing troops home was the right thing to do. And every brave American who wears our country's uniform should know we will make sure as long as I'm Commander in Chief we've got the strongest military in the world. And when our troops come home and take off their uniform, we will serve them as well as they've served us, because if you fought for this country, you shouldn't have to fight for a job or a roof over your heard when you come home. And finally, we'll cut the deficit by $4 trillion, but we're going to do it in a sensible way. We've already cut a trillion, working with Democrats and Republicans. So we can cut more spending. But we're not going to be able to reduce our deficit in a serious way unless the wealthiest households are willing to go back, for incomes over $250,000, to the same rate that we were paying under Bill Clinton, when the economy created nearly 23 million new jobs, we went from deficit to surplus, and businesses and investors did very well. Because the economy grows best that way, when it's broad based and everybody has a stake in how the economy grows. And I understand Governor Romney disagrees with this. He wasdid an interview and he says he thinks it's fair that he pays a lower tax rate making $20 million a year than the teacher who's making $50,000 a year. Now, I just think that's wrong. I'm notand if we're going to be serious about reducing the deficit, then we've got to make choices. And the choice I make is not asking middle class families to give up their home mortgage deduction or tax credits they get for raising their kids just to pay for a tax cut for me. I'm not going to ask students to pay more for college or kick kids off of Head Start programs or eliminate health insurance for millions of Americans who are poor or elderly or disabled just so I can get a tax break. Audience member. Thank you. [Laughter] The President. You're welcome. And by the way, the math still doesn't add up in terms of their plan, because when Governor Romney says he can cut taxes, increase military spending, close the deficit, all by getting rid of Planned Parenthood and Big Bird[laughter]he hasn'the needs a calculator because there's something wrong with his math. He says, don't worry, new tax cuts will pay for themselves. That is what we heard exactly from President Bush back in 2000, 2001. And it didn't work. And we know our plan does. So this is the choice that we face. This is what the election comes down to. And I said at the convention, over and over again we're told by our opponents that since government can't do everything, it should do almost nothing. It's sort of a you're-on-your-own philosophy. If you don't have health insurance, hope you don't get sick. [Laughter] If you can't afford to start a business or go to college, borrow money from your parents. [Laughter] That is not who we are. That's not how America became great. We believe in individual initiative, and we don't believe in helping people who aren't willing to help themselves, but we also understand there are some things we do better together. We understand that in America it's not just about what can be done for us, but what is done by us, together, as one nation, as one people. And that's what 2008 was about. We fought some fierce battles over the last 4 years, but everything we've gotten done, it happened ultimately because the American people came togetherBlack, White, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, able, disabledpeople came together. You're the reason Florida seniors are paying $600 less on their prescription drugs because of Obamacare. You did that. You're the reason that a working family in this State was able to save their home from foreclosure. There was somebody in the audience today, while we were taking a picture, who talked about their mom90 years oldbecause of the mortgage modification program we put into place, saved her home. Lives with her sister90 and 95 or[applause]. You did that, though. You did that. That's what's at stake. You made that happen. The kids at Gainesville or Tallahassee or here in Miami who are getting an education, maybe the first in their family, the veterans who are going to college on the new GI billthat's what we were fighting for. You're the reason that there are young immigrants all across this State who grew up here and went to school here and pledged allegiance to our flag, and they don't have to fear now that they're going to be deported from the only country they call home. You made that happen. You ended ""don't ask, don't tell."" You allowed us to bring our troops home so their families could greet them and say, ""Welcome home."" You did that. And so you can't afford to turn away now. You can't. I know that sometimes in politics folks are excited and they have fun, you have nice events like this and everybody gets dressed upand you guys are looking very good. [Laughter] But then sometimes when it gets tougher, people get discouraged and they're wondering, well, I don't know, is change really possible? And we get cynical, and we get doubtful. It happens to everybody; there's nothing wrong with that. It happens in our lives; it happens in our politics. It happens in everything that we do. But you can't succumb to that. And the reason is that when we don't get involved, when we don't insert ourselves into the process, when your voices aren't heard, then somebody else fills the void: the folks who are writing $10 million checks to try to buy this election, the folks who are trying to make it harder for Floridians to vote, the politicians in Washington who are trying to tell women that they shouldn't make their own decisions when it comes to their health care. So you're the ones who have to make sure that doesn't happen. That sign there, ""Forward,"" that's a message to me, but it's also a message to you. You've got that power, that capacity. And so when you think about the next 26 days, I would implore you to ask yourselves, is there something else I can do? Is there some little bit of difference that I can make? Here in Florida, last time in 2008, if you go precinct by precinct, it's a difference of a couple of hundred votes. I mean, it may be that just that little bit of extra effort is what makes a difference. And you will see me working harder than I've ever worked in my life, because every time I meet somebody who tells me that their mom was on the verge of losing their home, or their mom was on the verge of not being able to get treatment for a potentially deadly disease; every time I meet a young person who says I can go to college now because that change you made in the student loan program made it possible; every time I meet one of these DREAMer kids who explains how they feel like the weight of the world has been lifted off their shoulders; every time I think about all the people who are working so hard in this country and aren't asking for much, just asking for a shot; every time I think of them and knowing that they've got to have somebody in Washington who's fighting for them and who's thinking about them every single day, that's going to make me work as hard as I know how over the next 26 days and over the next 4 years. And I hope you have that same feeling. We cannot let up now. We cannot let up. I need you focused. I need you ready to fight. And if we do, we're going to win Florida. And when we win Florida, we're going to win this election. We're going to finish what we started and remind the world why the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth. Thank you, everybody. God bless you. Let's go get this done.",2008,obama
